about the old prince and criticized him.

"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His
Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she said
inquiringly.

"Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
want him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today?
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
morning?"

"No, mon pere."

Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice of
a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
after the soup the prince became more genial.

After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess
was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grew
pale on seeing her father-in-law.

She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.

"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's
question as to how she felt.

"Do you want anything?"

"No, merci, mon pere."

"Well, all right, all right."

He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood with
bowed head.

"Has the snow been shoveled back?"

"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my
stupidity."

"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then
proceeded to his study.

Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen
and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the
lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.

Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.

Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him. And
he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very well
and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
That never does any harm," thought Anatole.

He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round
with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."

"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if
continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
during the journey.

"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
with the old prince."

"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear
those old men! Eh?"

"Remember, for you everything depends on this."

In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
vainly trying to master her agitation.

"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
happen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enter
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."
The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The little
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha, the
lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him
like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received this information,
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voices
had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.

"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,
and sinking heavily into an armchair.

She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her
fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.

"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.
"They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we
shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"

The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the
arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her
companions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to
betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her would
prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes
grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried
to make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could
think of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
can make a face pretty.

"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
be at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"

It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.

"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary,
really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little gray
everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the
maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste
of artistic pleasure.

But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
into sobs.

"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
little effort."

The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
Mary.

"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.

The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of
birds.

"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.

Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.

"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I
tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,
"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not
in the least! Please change it."

"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
answered a voice struggling with tears.

Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
be shaken in her determination.

"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no
answer, she left the room.

Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she had
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daughter--at her own
breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.

"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the
maid's voice at the door.

She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a man,
be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longing
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said,
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy
will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the
answer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be
not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden
from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be
God's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill
His will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed, and
having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. What
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whose
care not a hair of man's head can fall?




CHAPTER IV

When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already in
the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, and
the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on
the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him, but
him she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant, and
handsome moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could
not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful light-
brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she was struck
by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button of his
uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly swinging one
foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming face at the
princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all.
Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but
he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and
imperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in self-confidence
remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the
impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say, the
effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilingly
examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent in
this way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this silence
inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to say.
Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which
particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--a
supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said
to them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?
You'd be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thought
very little--but his looks and manner gave that impression. The princess
felt this, and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare
expect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was
general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting in
the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves
there are some semi-private, long-established jokes and amusing
reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist--just as none
existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the
little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these
amusing recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle
Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself
pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.

"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you
always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"


* Anna Pavlovna.

"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"

"And our little tea table?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother
Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at
him, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!"

"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his son
and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and
he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was
pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she
is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.

When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.

She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had
left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
"Not at all bad!" he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, that
little companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we're
married, la petite est gentille." *


* The little one is charming.

The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What are
Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to
himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him.
"And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.
There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and even
the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and yet
the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer.
Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of
proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.
His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothing
against it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.
And that is what we shall see."

"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.

He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his
daughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!" he
thought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores
her!"

He went straight up to Prince Vasili.

"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"

"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,
self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and
befriend him."

Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.

"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss
me," and he offered his cheek.

Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
told him to expect.

Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at Princess
Mary.

"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeating
Prince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
daughter.

"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he.
"Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the
visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."

"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a
blush.

"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his
daughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
enough as it is."

And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
reduced to tears.

"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said
Prince Vasili.

"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,
turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."

"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside
the old prince.

"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught to
read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, my
dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.

"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to
restrain his laughter.

"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar
and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are
you off to the front?"

"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his father
with a laugh.

"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"
laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly
Prince Bolkonski frowned.

"You may go," he said to Anatole.

Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.

"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
said the old prince to Prince Vasili.

"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
is much better than ours."

"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's
a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince
Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone
together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
prince.

"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"
said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know my
principles--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll
see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"
he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son.

"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty
man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted a
companion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is no
genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or
kinsman."

"All right, all right, we'll see!"

As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real till
then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.

Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
tried to conceal them.

"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,
but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do
not like him."

And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.

Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
Bourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.

The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
struggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.

Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.

After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the
look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
then touching with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne
was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a
look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess.

"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it be
possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still
feeling his eyes gazing at her.

In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage,
but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her
shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did
everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.

"What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.

"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.




CHAPTER V

They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.

"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes, kind,
that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she had
seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed
to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark
corner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.

She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.

Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
rebuking her for her fall.

The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
time, muttering to herself.

"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.
"I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her
voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.

The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he had
been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would consider
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.

"The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and everything
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
herself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice it.
Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
Bourienne--I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has not
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
I'll let her see...."

The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to be
parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.

"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I never
invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
left."

"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the
shirt.

Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
the face that emerged from the shirt.

"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.

Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
Vasili and his son.

"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."

"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feet
into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he
went to the couch on which he slept.

Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
Anatole met in the conservatory.

Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation. It
seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She
read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.

The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of his
daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
expression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dry
hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.

He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.

"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an
unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not
come and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.
Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
principles, I refer it to you."

"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale
and then blushing.

"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you
to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand
it'!... And I ask you!"

"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.

"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to get
married. What about you? That's what I want to know."

The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if I
had to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The old
prince interrupted her.

"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and
take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while
you..."

The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.

"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
depends on your decision. Never mind me!"

"But I do not know, Father!"

"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over,
and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know
you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.

Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.

"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
that led to his own apartments.

An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince; he
added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
pretty face.

"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle
Bourienne.

"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to
do all I can for your happiness."

"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."

"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm
yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.

Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in
his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, as
if stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing at
his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
pinch of snuff.

"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.
Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my
dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.

"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a
proposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you wish
or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," he
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"

"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life from
yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing at
Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.

"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,
frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only
bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
that she winced and uttered a cry.

Prince Vasili rose.

"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
long. Say 'perhaps.'"

"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for
the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."

"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen
you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old
prince. "Very, very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracing
Prince Vasili.

"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation is
to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love and
self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie's
happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. I
will do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich I
will give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so
happy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,
helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she could
so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thought
Princess Mary.




CHAPTER VI

It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter
was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
letter.

Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same
time.

Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still
living with the Rostovs.

"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
sympathize in any way.

The count sobbed yet more.

"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy...
the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell the
little countess!"

Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her own
eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,
would inform her.

At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very
likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints
began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count
and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha, who, of the whole
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with her
brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
she was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
relating to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her
chair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed
head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.

"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"

"Nothing, my dear."

"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know
something."

Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.

"You are a little slyboots," she said.

"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.

"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."

"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at
once."

Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
on condition that she should tell no one.

"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't
tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.

"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.

"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.

Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced
on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.

She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.

"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
wrote himself," said she through her tears.

"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,
pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very
glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are all
blubberers and understand nothing."

Natasha smiled through her tears.

"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.

"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."

"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived
you. Let us go to Mamma."

Petya paced the room in silence for a time.

"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so
many that there'd have been a heap of them."

"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"

"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.

"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.

Sonya smiled.

"Do I remember Nicholas?"

"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture,
evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I remember
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember
Boris. I don't remember him a bit."

"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.

"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I
remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...
No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all."

"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
long as I live."

Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was such
love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything
like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.

"Shall you write to him?" she asked.

Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
himself?

"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
blushing.

"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"

Sonya smiled.

"No."

"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."

"Why should you be ashamed?"

"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."

"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
spectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count
Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha's
Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"

"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.

"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with
the air of an old brigadier.

The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner. On
retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on
tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.

"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Come
later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.

The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.

At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of
a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
public to appreciate his skill.

"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.

When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room, and
the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of the
campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss,
and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he
loved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was crying.

"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be
glad and not cry."

This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked at
her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought the
countess.

Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she did
not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who had
first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son should now
be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly warrior
doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance. The
universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
countess. Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages, had
seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty years
before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
letter, he now was.

"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
high--I always said...."

For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment of
the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovs
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier to
Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from
the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
things the old count sent to his son.




CHAPTER VII

On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight
to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.

That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that
the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after
their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed
with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of
tempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebrating
awards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions to
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recently
opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had just
celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On
receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'
camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to get his
uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,
and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was riding
was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he
rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his
comrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar who
had been under fire.

The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
proper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who had
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made the
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by a
letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain
a post on the commander-in-chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having rested
after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at a
round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess. Berg
held a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way
characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought
only of whatever he was engaged on.

"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.

"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his
hand.

At that moment the door opened.

"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.

"Dear me, how you have changed!"

Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did. But
notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
kissed him three times.

They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.

"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, not
like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger and
with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own mud-
bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud voice,
popped her head in at the door.

"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.

"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not
expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not
think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been
under fire already?" asked Boris.

Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
glanced at Berg with a smile.

"As you see," he said.

"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode
with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I
can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our
officers."

And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.

"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."

Boris made a grimace.

"If you really want it," said he.

He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
for wine.

"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.

Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the
letter.

"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy purse
that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I
can tell you for myself..."

"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter from
home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything
over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of your
way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his
face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
old acquaintance."

"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up
and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.

"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.

Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been
noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.

"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.

"Why?"

"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such a
fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well,
have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"

In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
it to its destination and make use of it.

"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under
the table.

"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.

"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
for!"

"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the
address. "This letter would be of great use to you."

"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."

"Why not?" inquired Boris.

"It's a lackey's job!"

"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his
head.

"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...
Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.

"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should
much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."

"Why?"

"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
make as successful a career of it as possible."

"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.

He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.

Old Gabriel brought in the wine.

"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.
I can't."

"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.

"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.

Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned,
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the
sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories
of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories of
the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia he
had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour of
the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a
pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a
violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
favorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the company
commander.

"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew I
was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and so
my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showed
how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it would
have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and self-
complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying is,
stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but rather
of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he
shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next
day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what
keeping one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting
his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.

"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.

But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and
as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon
Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generally
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
it really was. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no account
have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to tell
everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, and
inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything as
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
told them all that.

In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imagine
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew,
whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked to
help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and
being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day
before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent with
papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to
find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly on
the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a mere
stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
of the hussar of the line.

In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of the
contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.

"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to
say more in the presence of a stranger.

Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could give
no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
gaily.

"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "we
will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me
after the review and we will do what is possible."

And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"

"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the aide-
de-camp.

Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
told about that affair!"

"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our
stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our
stories have some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on the
staff who get rewards without doing anything!"

"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and
particularly amiable smile.

A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.

"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I
don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."

"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two
we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"
he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
both he went out.

Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home.
Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
adjutant whom he so hated.




CHAPTER VIII

The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and
those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.

From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs
and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with the
smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
smooth--felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and yet
at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
enormous whole.

From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on
the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.

A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting
army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those
recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line; and
the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one
command, and in a like order.

Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
swept over all the troops.

From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: "Eyes
front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated by
others from various sides and all became silent.

In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This was
the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the
first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
immensity of the power they constituted.

Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
triumph.

He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
"Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing
ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.

Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--the
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
whole mass of men was concentrated.

The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's
attention.

Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness and
ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
movement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.

Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.

Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.

"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought
Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"

The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!

"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."

"Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.

The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the
soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and then
detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
unexpectedly through his mind.

"So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened? How
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,
but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all
expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it will
certainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling shoulders
close to his eyes.
indeed, 
quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyte
burst out laughing.

"Do you know, you are a terrible chap 
for all your innocent airs,"
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer who
gives himself the airs of 
a monarch."

Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were
saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to 
the French? One has to
know how to deal with them."

Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like 
one
quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
from the shelf the first book that came 
to his hand (it was Caesar's
Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.

"What have you done 
to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said
Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white 
hands.

Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his 
hand.

"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the
right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace 
is possible but--I do not
know how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."

It was evident that Prince 
Andrew was not interested in such abstract
conversation.

"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you at
last decided 
on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.

Pierre sat up 
on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.

"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or 
the other."

"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."

Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad 
with an abbe as tutor, and
had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow his
father dismissed the 
abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
anything. 
Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to
me all about it, and I will help 
you in everything." Pierre had already
been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided on
anything. It was about 
this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
Pierre rubbed his forehead.

"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the 
abbe whom he had
met that evening.

"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us
talk business. Have you been 
to the Horse Guards?"

"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to
tell you. There 
is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
freedom I could understand it and should be the 
first to enter the army;
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
not right."

Prince Andrew 
only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply 
to such nonsense,
but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than
the one Prince Andrew gave 
to this naive question.

"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"
he said.

"And that would 
be splendid," said Pierre.

Prince Andrew smiled ironically.

"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."

"Well, why are 
you going to the war?" asked Pierre.

"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused.
"I 
am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"




CHAPTER VII

The rustle of a woman's dress was 
heard in the next room. Prince Andrew
shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had 
had
in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.
The princess came in. She had changed her gown 
for a house dress as
fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a
chair for her.

"How is 
it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and
fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never 
got married? How
stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so,
but you have no 
sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you are,
Monsieur Pierre!"

"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand 
why he
wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess with
none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by 
young men in their
intercourse with young women.

The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick.

"Ah, that is just 
what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; I
don't in the least understand why men can't live without 
wars. How is it
that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now you
shall judge between us. 
I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's aide-de-
camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well known, so much
appreciated 
by everyone. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady
asking, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did 
indeed." She laughed.
"He is so well received everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp
to the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke 
to him most graciously.
Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"

Pierre looked at his 
friend and, noticing that he did not like the
conversation, gave no reply.

"When are you starting?" he asked.
"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered 
Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, 
smiling and drawing her
work nearer to her.

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

"When are you starting?" he asked.
"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna 
Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling 
and drawing her
work nearer to her.

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices and.
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an
expression of 
profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
patroness. She added that 
Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.

The prince was silent 
and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
both to rebuke him 
(for daring to speak as he had done of a man
recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to 
console him, so she
said:

"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out
everyone has been enraptured by 
her? They say she is amazingly
beautiful."

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

"I often think," she continued after a 
short pause, drawing nearer to
the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and
social topics were 
ended and the time had come for intimate
conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
distributed. Why has 
fate given you two such splendid children? I don't
speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in 
a tone
admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charming
children. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, 
and so you
don't deserve to have them."

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would 
have said I lack the
bump of paternity."

"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know 
I am
dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her face
assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's
and 
you were pitied...."

The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,
awaiting a reply. He frowned.

"What would you have me 
do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a
father could for their education, and they have both turned 
out fools.
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
is the only difference between them." 
He said this smiling in a way more
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
very clearly 
revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.

"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a 
father
there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
looking up pensively.

"I am your faithful slave and to 
you alone I can confess that my
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to 
bear. That
is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"

He said no more, but expressed his resignation to 
cruel fate by a
gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the 
abbe whom he had
met that evening.

"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us
talk business. Have you been 
to the Horse Guards?"

"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to
tell you. There 
is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
freedom I could understand it and should be the 
first to enter the army;
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
not right."

Prince Andrew 
only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply 
to such nonsense,
but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than
the one Prince Andrew gave 
to this naive question.
"The execution of 
the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a
political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness
of soul by 
not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of
that deed."

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

"What, 
Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
work nearer to 
her.

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee
with the palm of his hand.

The 
vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
audience over his spectacles and continued.

"I say so," he continued desperately, 
"because the Bourbons fled from
the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and 
so for the general good,
he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."

"Won't you come over to 
the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.

But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, 
"Napoleon is great because
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
that was good in it--equality of citizenship 
and freedom of speech and
of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."

"Yes, if having obtained power, without 
availing himself of it to commit
murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him
a great 
man," remarked the vicomte.

"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid
them of the 
Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying 
by
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
wish to express all that was in his mind.

"What? Revolution and 
regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But
won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.

"Rousseau's Contrat Social," said 
the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."

"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, 
and regicide," again interjected an
ironical voice.

"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.
What is important 
are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
in full force."


"I say so," he continued desperately, 
"because the Bourbons fled from
the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and 
so for the general good,
he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."

"Won't you come over to 
the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.

But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, 
"Napoleon is great because
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
that was good in it--equality of citizenship 
and freedom of speech and
of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."

"Yes, if having obtained power, without 
availing himself of it to commit
murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him
a great 
man," remarked the vicomte.

"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid
them of the 
Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying 
by
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
wish to express all that was in his mind.

"What? Revolution and 
regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But
won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.

"Rousseau's Contrat Social," said 
the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."

"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, 
and regicide," again interjected an
ironical voice.

"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.
What is important 
are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
in full force."

"Liberty 
and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last
deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words 
were,
"high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not love
liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.
Have 
people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We
wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."

Prince Andrew kept looking with 
an amused smile from Pierre to the
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
Pierre's outburst 
Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had not
exasperated the vicomte, and 
had convinced herself that it was
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
a vigorous attack 
on the orator.

"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact
of a great man executing a 
duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocent
and untried?"

"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the
18th Brumaire; 
was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
all like the conduct of a great man!"

"And the 
prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the
little princess, shrugging her shoulders.

"He's a low fellow, say what you 
will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.

Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His
smile was unlike the half-smile 
of other people. When he smiled, his
grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another-
-a childlike, kindly, even rather 
silly look, which seemed to ask
forgiveness.

The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this
young Jacobin 
was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were
silent.

"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" 
said Prince Andrew.
"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between
his acts as a private person, as 
a general, and as an emperor. So it
seems to me."

"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival 
of this
reinforcement.

"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was
great on the bridge of Arcola, and in 
the hospital at Jaffa where he
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other acts
which it is difficult 
to justify."

Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to 
his wife that it was time to
go.

Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,
and asking them all 
to be seated began:

"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.
Excuse me, Vicomte--I must 
tell it in Russian or the point will be
lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian
as 
a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
attention 
to his story.

"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must
have two footmen behind 
her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."

Here Prince 
Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with
difficulty.

"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,
get 
up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"

Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing 
long before his
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, 
did however
smile.

"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and
her long hair came down...." Here 
he could contain himself no longer and
went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."

And so the anecdote 
ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna 
Pavlovna and the
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably ending
Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the
conversation 
broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and
next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when 
and
where.




CHAPTER VI

Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began
to take their leave.

Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the 
average height, broad, with huge
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
room and 
still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was 
absent-
minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the general's
three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling 
at the plume, till the general
asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and inability to
enter a room and converse 
in it was, however, redeemed by his kindly,
simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, with
a Christian mildness 
that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion,
nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope you will
change 
your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."

When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody
saw his 
smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." And
everyone, including 
Anna Pavlovna, felt this.

Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders to
the footman who was helping 
him on with his cloak, listened
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
come into the hall. Prince 
Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.

"Go in, Annette, or you will 
catch cold," said the little princess,
taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low
voice.

Anna Pavlovna had 
already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.

"I rely on you, 
my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Write
to her and let me know how her father looks 
at the matter. Au revoir!"--
and she left the hall.

Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
close to her, 
began to whisper something.

Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a
cloak, waiting for the conversation 
to finish. They listened to the
French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
understanding but not wishing to 
appear to do so. The princess as usual
spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.

"I am very glad I did not 
go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte
"-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"

"They say the 
ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing up
her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will 
be there."

"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from 
the footman, whom he even
pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could 
have said which) after the
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
though embracing 
her.

Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her
husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy 
did he
seem.

"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.

Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the 
latest fashion
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
following the princess, whom a footman 
was helping into the carriage.

"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as
with his feet.

The princess, picking 
up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
pretense of 
helping, was in everyone's way.

"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable
tone to Prince Hippolyte who 
was blocking his path.

"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and
affectionately.

The postilion started, the carriage wheels 
rattled. Prince Hippolyte
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
whom he had promised to take home.
Buonapartes. But I 
warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors 
perpetrated by that
Antichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothing more
to do with you and you are no longer 
my friend, no longer my 'faithful
slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frightened
you--sit 
down and tell me all the news."

It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna
Scherer, maid 
of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With
these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high 
rank and
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovna
had had a cough for some days. She 
was, as she said, suffering from la
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the
elite.

All 
her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered
by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:

"If you have nothing 
better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too 
terrible,
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10--Annette
Scherer."

"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, 
not in the least
disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and 
had stars on
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
refined French in which our 
grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
who had grown old 
in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,
kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and 
shining head,
and complacently seated himself on the sofa.

"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's 
mind
at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness and
affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could 
be
discerned.

"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like
these if one has any feeling?" said 
Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying the
whole evening, I hope?"

"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I must
put 
in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming for
me to take me there."

"I thought today's fete had 
been canceled. I confess all these
festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."

"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment 
would have been
put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
said things he did not 
even wish to be believed.

"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's
dispatch? You know everything."

"What can one say 
about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless
tone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
burnt his 
boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."

Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a 
stale
part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
become 
her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feel
like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint 
the
expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it
did not suit her faded features, always played round 
her lips expressed,
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
which she neither wished, nor could, nor 
considered it necessary, to
correct.

In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst
out:

"Oh, don't speak to me of 
Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things,
but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is
betraying us! Russia 
alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
thing 
I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
the noblest role on earth, and he is so 
virtuous and noble that God will
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
revolution, which has 
become more terrible than ever in the person of
this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the 
just
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor 
Alexander's loftiness
of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and
still seeks, some secret motive in our 
actions. What answer did
Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants 
nothing for
himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have they
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised 
they will not
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I 
don't believe a word
that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian
neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only 
in God and the lofty
destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"

She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

"I 
think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent
instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have 
captured the King of
Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a
cup of tea?"

"In a moment. 
A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expecting
two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is
connected 
with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good 
ones. And
also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"

"I 
shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," he
added with studied carelessness as if it had 
only just occurred to him,
though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his
visit, "is it 
true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is 
a poor
creature."

Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna 
to secure it for the
baron.

Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
anyone else had a right 
to criticize what the Empress desired or was
pleased with.

"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"
was 
all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.

As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an
expression of 
profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
patroness. She added that 
Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.

The prince was silent 
and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
both to rebuke him 
(for daring to speak as he had done of a man
recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to 
console him, so she
said:

"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out
everyone has been enraptured by 
her? They say she is amazingly
beautiful."

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

"I often think," she continued after a 
short pause, drawing nearer to
the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and
social topics were 
ended and the time had come for intimate
conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
distributed. Why has 
fate given you two such splendid children? I don't
speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in 
a tone
admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charming
children. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, 
and so you
don't deserve to have them."

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would 
have said I lack the
bump of paternity."

"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know 
I am
dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her face
assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's
and 
you were pitied...."

The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,
awaiting a reply. He frowned.

"What would you have me 
do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a
father could for their education, and they have both turned 
out fools.
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
is the only difference between them." 
He said this smiling in a way more
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
very clearly 
revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.

"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a 
father
there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
looking up pensively.

"I am your faithful slave and to 
you alone I can confess that my
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to 
bear. That
is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"

He said no more, but expressed his resignation to 
cruel fate by a
gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.

"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" she
asked. "They say old 
maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little 
person who is
very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary
Bolkonskaya."

Prince Vasili did not reply, though, 
with the quickness of memory and
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
the head that 
he was considering this information.

"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
current of his thoughts, 
"that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be 
in five
years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what we
fathers have to put up with.... Is 
this princess of yours rich?"

"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the
well-known Prince 
Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the
late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is 
very clever
but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a
brother; I think you know him, 
he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an
aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here tonight."

"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, 
suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna's
hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair for
me and I shall always be 
your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as a
village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and 
of good
family and that's all I want."

And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
maid of 
honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as
he lay back in his armchair, looking 
in another direction.

"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, young
Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing 
can be
arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
apprenticeship as old maid."




CHAPTER II

Anna Pavlovna's drawing room 
was gradually filling. The highest
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
and character but alike in the social 
circle to which they belonged.
Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her father
to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore 
a ball dress and her badge
as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la
femme la plus seduisante 
de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had been
married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to 
any
large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,
Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio
and 
many others had also come.


* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.

To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not 
yet seen my aunt,"
or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to a
little old 
lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
sailing in from another room as soon as the 
guests began to arrive; and
slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna
mentioned each one's name and 
then left them.

Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not
one of them knew, not one of 
them wanted to know, and not one of them
cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
solemn interest and 
silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
the same words, about their health and her own, and the 
health of Her
Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, though
politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old 
woman with a
sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return
to her the whole evening.

The young 
Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold-
embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicate
dark 
down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but it
lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming 
when she
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
with a thoroughly attractive woman, her 
defect--the shortness of her
upper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special and
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened 
at the sight of this pretty
young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
carrying 
her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
who looked at her, after being in her company and 
talking to her a
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
and health. All who 
talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that 
they were in a
specially amiable mood that day.

The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying
steps, her workbag 
on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all 
she was doing was a
pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"
said she in French, 
displaying her bag and addressing all present.
"Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," she
added, 
turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite a
small reception, and just see how badly I 
am dressed." And she spread
out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,
girdled with a broad ribbon just 
below the breast.

"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"
replied Anna Pavlovna.

"You know," said the princess in 
the same tone of voice and still in
French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
to 
get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an 
answer she
turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.

"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili 
to
Anna Pavlovna.

One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
at 
that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
young man was an illegitimate son of Count 
Bezukhov, a well-known
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
had not yet entered either the 
military or civil service, as he had only
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
first 
appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But 
in spite of
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
of something too large and unsuited 
to the place, came over her face
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than
the other men 
in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to the
clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
distinguished him 
from everyone else in that drawing room.

"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
invalid," 
said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt
as she conducted him to her.

Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued 
to look round as
if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
princess with 
a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.

Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
aunt without waiting 
to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. Anna
Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the 
Abbe
Morio? He is a most interesting man."

"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
interesting 
but hardly feasible."

"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and get
away to attend to her duties 
as hostess. But Pierre now committed a
reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had
finished speaking 
to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
wished to get away. With his head bent, and his 
big feet spread apart,
he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.

"We will talk of it later," said 
Anna Pavlovna with a smile.

And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
resumed 
her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
to help at any point where the conversation might happen 
to flag. As the
foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
round and notices here 
a spindle that has stopped or there one that
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to the

But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.

Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in the
large drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gave
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was so
strange that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sit
down, and smiled affectionately.

"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.

And he again turned to Pierre.

"Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button of
his waistcoat.

Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story
about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince
Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something and
went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.
The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched
Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and her
look seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault."

"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he
again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich,
asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.
Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.

When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his wife,
was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.

"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."

"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.

Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down on
a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to be
dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.

"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."

The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and
Helene still sat talking just as before.

"Still the same," she said to her husband.

Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went past
the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he went
joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
rose in alarm on seeing it.

"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!" (He
put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)--"My dear
boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved your
father... and she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."

He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.

"Princess, come here!" he shouted.

The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using her
handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
Helene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again.

"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so it
is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because it's
definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held the
hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosom as it
rose and fell.

"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.

"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but could
not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. She
drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.

"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.

Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
unpleasantly excited expression.

"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre.

"Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said at such
moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.


* "I love you."

Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large,
newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said,
of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.




CHAPTER III

Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in
November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a
visit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall
think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same
time, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is
accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow him
personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his father, he
feels for you."

"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are
coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little
princess on hearing the news.

Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.

A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evening
in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.

Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And now,
from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,
he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed into
a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski was
particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a bad
temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether his being in a bad
temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in a
bad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect
not to go to the prince with his report.

"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat on his
heels--we know what that means...."

However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the
soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings,
frowning and silent.

"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling
his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the
house.

"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."

The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be thanked,"
thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"

"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard,
your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."

The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
frowning.

"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his
shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my
daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"

"Your honor, I thought..."

"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
rapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!... I'll
teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have
hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the
blow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.

But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the
stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued to
shout: "Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lift
his stick again but hurried into the house.

Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew that
the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the same
as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes.
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she
ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought:
"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with
him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he has
done before) that I'm in the dumps."

The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.

"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.

"And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," he thought-
-referring to the little princess who was not in the dining room.

"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"

"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright
smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."

"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.

His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he flung
it away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The little
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.

"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heaven
knows what a fright might do."

In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not realize
because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt for
her. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
about the old prince and criticized him.

"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His
Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she said
inquiringly.

"Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
want him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today?
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
morning?"

"No, mon pere."

Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice of
a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
after the soup the prince became more genial.

After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess
was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grew
pale on seeing her father-in-law.

She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.

"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's
question as to how she felt.

"Do you want anything?"

"No, merci, mon pere."

"Well, all right, all right."

He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood with
bowed head.

"Has the snow been shoveled back?"

"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my
stupidity."

"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then
proceeded to his study.

Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen
and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the
lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.

Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.

Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him. And
he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very well
and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
That never does any harm," thought Anatole.

He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round
with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."

"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if
continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
during the journey.

"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
with the old prince."

"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear
those old men! Eh?"

"Remember, for you everything depends on this."

In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
vainly trying to master her agitation.

"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
happen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enter
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."
The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The little
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha, the
lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him
like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received this information,
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voices
had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.

"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,
and sinking heavily into an armchair.

She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her
fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.

"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.
"They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we
shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"

The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the
arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her
companions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to
betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her would
prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes
grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried
to make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could
think of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
can make a face pretty.

"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
be at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"

It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.

"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary,
really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little gray
everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the
maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste
of artistic pleasure.

But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
into sobs.

"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
little effort."

The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
Mary.

"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.

The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of
birds.

"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.

Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.

"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I
tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,
"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not
in the least! Please change it."

"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
answered a voice struggling with tears.

Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
be shaken in her determination.

"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no
answer, she left the room.

Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she had
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daughter--at her own
breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.

"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the
maid's voice at the door.

She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a man,
be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longing
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said,
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy
will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the
answer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be
not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden
from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be
God's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill
His will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed, and
having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. What
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whose
care not a hair of man's head can fall?




CHAPTER IV

When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already in
the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, and
the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on
the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him, but
him she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant, and
handsome moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could
not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful light-
brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she was struck
by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button of his
uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly swinging one
foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming face at the
princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all.
Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but
he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and
imperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in self-confidence
remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the
impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say, the
effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilingly
examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent in
this way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this silence
inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to say.
Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which
particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--a
supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said
to them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?
You'd be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thought
very little--but his looks and manner gave that impression. The princess
felt this, and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare
expect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was
general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting in
the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves
there are some semi-private, long-established jokes and amusing
reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist--just as none
existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the
little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these
amusing recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle
Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself
pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.

"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you
always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"


* Anna Pavlovna.

"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"

"And our little tea table?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother
Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at
him, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!"

"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his son
and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and
he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was
pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she
is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.

When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.

She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had
left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
"Not at all bad!" he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, that
little companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we're
married, la petite est gentille." *


* The little one is charming.

The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What are
Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to
himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him.
"And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.
There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and even
the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and yet
the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer.
Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of
proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.
His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothing
against it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.
And that is what we shall see."

"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.

He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his
daughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!" he
thought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores
her!"

He went straight up to Prince Vasili.

"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"

"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,
self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and
befriend him."

Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.

"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss
me," and he offered his cheek.

Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
told him to expect.

Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at Princess
Mary.

"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeating
Prince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
daughter.

"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he.
"Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the
visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."

"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a
blush.

"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his
daughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
enough as it is."

And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
reduced to tears.

"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said
Prince Vasili.

"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,
turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."

"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside
the old prince.

"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught to
read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, my
dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.

"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to
restrain his laughter.

"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar
and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are
you off to the front?"

"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his father
with a laugh.

"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"
laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly
Prince Bolkonski frowned.

"You may go," he said to Anatole.

Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.

"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
said the old prince to Prince Vasili.

"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
is much better than ours."

"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's
a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince
Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone
together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
prince.

"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"
said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know my
principles--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll
see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"
he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son.

"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty
man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted a
companion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is no
genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or
kinsman."

"All right, all right, we'll see!"

As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real till
then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.

Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
tried to conceal them.

"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,
but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do
not like him."

And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.

Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
Bourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.

The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
struggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.

Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.

After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the
look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
then touching with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne
was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a
look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess.

"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it be
possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still
feeling his eyes gazing at her.

In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage,
but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her
shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did
everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.

"What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.

"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.




CHAPTER V

They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.

"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes, kind,
that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she had
seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed
to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark
corner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.

She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.

Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
rebuking her for her fall.

The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
time, muttering to herself.

"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.
"I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her
voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.

The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he had
been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would consider
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.

"The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and everything
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
herself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice it.
Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
Bourienne--I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has not
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
I'll let her see...."

The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to be
parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.

"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I never
invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
left."

"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the
shirt.

Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
the face that emerged from the shirt.

"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.

Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
Vasili and his son.

"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."

"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feet
into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he
went to the couch on which he slept.

Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
Anatole met in the conservatory.

Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation. It
seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She
read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.

The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of his
daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
expression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dry
hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.

He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.

"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an
unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not
come and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.
Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
principles, I refer it to you."

"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale
and then blushing.

"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you
to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand
it'!... And I ask you!"

"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.

"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to get
married. What about you? That's what I want to know."

The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if I
had to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The old
prince interrupted her.

"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and
take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while
you..."

The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.

"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
depends on your decision. Never mind me!"

"But I do not know, Father!"

"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over,
and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know
you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.

Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.

"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
that led to his own apartments.

An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince; he
added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
pretty face.

"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle
Bourienne.

"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to
do all I can for your happiness."

"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."

"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm
yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.

Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in
his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, as
if stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing at
his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
pinch of snuff.

"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.
Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my
dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.

"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a
proposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you wish
or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," he
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"

"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life from
yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing at
Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.

"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,
frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only
bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
that she winced and uttered a cry.

Prince Vasili rose.

"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
long. Say 'perhaps.'"

"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for
the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."

"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen
you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old
prince. "Very, very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracing
Prince Vasili.

"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation is
to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love and
self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie's
happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. I
will do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich I
will give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so
happy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,
helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she could
so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thought
Princess Mary.




CHAPTER VI

It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter
was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
letter.

Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same
time.

Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still
living with the Rostovs.

"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
sympathize in any way.

The count sobbed yet more.

"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy...
the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell the
little countess!"

Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her own
eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,
would inform her.

At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very
likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints
began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count
and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha, who, of the whole
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with her
brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
she was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
relating to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her
chair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed
head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.

"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"

"Nothing, my dear."

"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know
something."

Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.

"You are a little slyboots," she said.

"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.

"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."

"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at
once."

Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
on condition that she should tell no one.

"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't
tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.

"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.

"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.

Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced
on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.

She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.

"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
wrote himself," said she through her tears.

"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,
pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very
glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are all
blubberers and understand nothing."

Natasha smiled through her tears.

"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.

"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."

"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived
you. Let us go to Mamma."

Petya paced the room in silence for a time.

"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so
many that there'd have been a heap of them."

"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"

"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.

"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.

Sonya smiled.

"Do I remember Nicholas?"

"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture,
evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I remember
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember
Boris. I don't remember him a bit."

"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.

"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I
remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...
No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all."

"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
long as I live."

Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was such
love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything
like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.

"Shall you write to him?" she asked.

Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
himself?

"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
blushing.

"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"

Sonya smiled.

"No."

"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."

"Why should you be ashamed?"

"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."

"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
spectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count
Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha's
Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"

"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.

"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with
the air of an old brigadier.

The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner. On
retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on
tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.

"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Come
later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.

The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.

At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of
a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
public to appreciate his skill.

"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.

When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room, and
the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of the
campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss,
and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he
loved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was crying.

"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be
glad and not cry."

This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked at
her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought the
countess.

Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she did
not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who had
first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son should now
be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly warrior
doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance. The
universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
countess. Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages, had
seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty years
before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
letter, he now was.

"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
high--I always said...."

For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment of
the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovs
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier to
Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from
the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
things the old count sent to his son.




CHAPTER VII

On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight
to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.

That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that
the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after
their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed
with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of
tempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebrating
awards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions to
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recently
opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had just
celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On
receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'
camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to get his
uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,
and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was riding
was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he
rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his
comrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar who
had been under fire.

The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
proper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who had
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made the
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by a
letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain
a post on the commander-in-chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having rested
after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at a
round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess. Berg
held a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way
characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought
only of whatever he was engaged on.

"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.

"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his
hand.

At that moment the door opened.

"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.

"Dear me, how you have changed!"

Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did. But
notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
kissed him three times.

They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.

"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, not
like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger and
with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own mud-
bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud voice,
popped her head in at the door.

"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.

"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not
expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not
think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been
under fire already?" asked Boris.

Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
glanced at Berg with a smile.

"As you see," he said.

"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode
with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I
can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our
officers."

And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.

"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."

Boris made a grimace.

"If you really want it," said he.

He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
for wine.

"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.

Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the
letter.

"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy purse
that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I
can tell you for myself..."

"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter from
home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything
over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of your
way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his
face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
old acquaintance."

"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up
and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.

"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.

Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been
noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.

"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.

"Why?"

"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such a
fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well,
have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"

In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
it to its destination and make use of it.

"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under
the table.

"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.

"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
for!"

"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the
address. "This letter would be of great use to you."

"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."

"Why not?" inquired Boris.

"It's a lackey's job!"

"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his
head.

"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...
Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.

"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should
much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."

"Why?"

"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
make as successful a career of it as possible."

"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.

He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.

Old Gabriel brought in the wine.

"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.
I can't."

"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.

"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.

Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned,
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the
sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories
of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories of
the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia he
had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour of
the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a
pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a
violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
favorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the company
commander.

"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew I
was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and so
my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showed
how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it would
have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and self-
complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying is,
stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but rather
of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he
shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next
day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what
keeping one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting
his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.

"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.

But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and
as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon
Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generally
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
it really was. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no account
have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to tell
everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, and
inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything as
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
told them all that.

In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imagine
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew,
whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked to
help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and
being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day
before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent with
papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to
find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly on
the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a mere
stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
of the hussar of the line.

In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of the
contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.

"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to
say more in the presence of a stranger.

Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could give
no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
gaily.

"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "we
will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me
after the review and we will do what is possible."

And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"

"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the aide-
de-camp.

Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
told about that affair!"

"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our
stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our
stories have some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on the
staff who get rewards without doing anything!"

"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and
particularly amiable smile.

A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.

"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I
don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."

"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two
we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"
he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
both he went out.

Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home.
Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
adjutant whom he so hated.




CHAPTER VIII

The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and
those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.

From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs
and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with the
smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
smooth--felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and yet
at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
enormous whole.

From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on
the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.

A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting
army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those
recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line; and
the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one
command, and in a like order.

Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
swept over all the troops.

From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: "Eyes
front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated by
others from various sides and all became silent.

In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This was
the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the
first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
immensity of the power they constituted.

Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
triumph.

He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
"Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing
ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.

Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--the
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
whole mass of men was concentrated.

The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's
attention.

Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness and
ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
movement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.

Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.

Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.

"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought
Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"

The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!

"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."

"Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.

The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the
soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and then
detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
unexpectedly through his mind.

"So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened? How
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,
but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all
expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it will
certainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling shoulders
close to his eyes.

Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it
awkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky man
and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed
of a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoled
himself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about? How did it
begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then there was
nothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards with
her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it begin,
when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her side as her
betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her breathing, her
movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was
not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why they
all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration he would
expand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune.
Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a second
time. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was
said.

"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince
Vasili a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow."

Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at
him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought Pierre.
"What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlike
smile, and Helene smiled too.

"When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated Prince
Vasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute.

"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.

"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.

After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the
drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave of
Helene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an important
occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away,
refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful
silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity of his
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. The old general
grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. "Oh, the old fool,"
he thought. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when she's
fifty."

"I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old
princess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have
stayed longer."

The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her
daughter's happiness.

While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time
alone with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting. He
had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,
but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable,
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He felt
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else's place here beside
Helene. "This happiness is not for you," some inner voice whispered to
him. "This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in
you."

But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.

Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in the
large drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gave
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was so
strange that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sit
down, and smiled affectionately.

"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.

And he again turned to Pierre.

"Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button of
his waistcoat.

Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story
about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince
Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something and
went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.
The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched
Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and her
look seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault."

"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he
again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich,
asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.
Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.

When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his wife,
was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.

"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."

"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.

Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down on
a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to be
dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.

"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."

The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and
Helene still sat talking just as before.

"Still the same," she said to her husband.

Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went past
the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he went
joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
rose in alarm on seeing it.

"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!" (He
put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)--"My dear
boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved your
father... and she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."

He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.

"Princess, come here!" he shouted.

The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using her
handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
Helene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again.

"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so it
is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because it's
definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held the
hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosom as it
rose and fell.

"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.

"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but could
not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. She
drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.

"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.

Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
unpleasantly excited expression.

"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre.

"Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said at such
moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.


* "I love you."

Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large,
newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said,
of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.




CHAPTER III

Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in
November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a
visit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall
think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same
time, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is
accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow him
personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his father, he
feels for you."

"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are
coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little
princess on hearing the news.

Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.

A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evening
in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.

Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And now,
from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,
he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed into
a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski was
particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a bad
temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether his being in a bad
temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in a
bad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect
not to go to the prince with his report.

"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat on his
heels--we know what that means...."

However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the
soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings,
frowning and silent.

"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling
his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the
house.

"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."

The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be thanked,"
thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"

"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard,
your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."

The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
frowning.

"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his
shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my
daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"

"Your honor, I thought..."

"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
rapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!... I'll
teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have
hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the
blow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.

But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the
stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued to
shout: "Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lift
his stick again but hurried into the house.

Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew that
the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the same
as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes.
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she
ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought:
"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with
him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he has
done before) that I'm in the dumps."

The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.

"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.

"And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," he thought-
-referring to the little princess who was not in the dining room.

"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"

"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright
smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."

"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.

His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he flung
it away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The little
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.

"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heaven
knows what a fright might do."

In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not realize
because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt for
her. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
about the old prince and criticized him.

"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His
Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she said
inquiringly.

"Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don't
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
want him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today?
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
morning?"

"No, mon pere."

Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice of
a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
after the soup the prince became more genial.

After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess
was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grew
pale on seeing her father-in-law.

She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.

"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's
question as to how she felt.

"Do you want anything?"

"No, merci, mon pere."

"Well, all right, all right."

He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood with
bowed head.

"Has the snow been shoveled back?"

"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my
stupidity."

"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing his
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then
proceeded to his study.

Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen
and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the
lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.

Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.

Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him. And
he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very well
and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
That never does any harm," thought Anatole.

He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked round
with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."

"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if
continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
during the journey.

"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
with the old prince."

"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear
those old men! Eh?"

"Remember, for you everything depends on this."

In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
vainly trying to master her agitation.

"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
happen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enter
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."
The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The little
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha, the
lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him
like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received this information,
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voices
had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.

"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,
and sinking heavily into an armchair.

She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her
fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.

"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.
"They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we
shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"

The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the
arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her
companions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to
betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her would
prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes
grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried
to make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could
think of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
can make a face pretty.

"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
be at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"

It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.

"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary,
really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little gray
everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the
maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste
of artistic pleasure.

But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
into sobs.

"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
little effort."

The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
Mary.

"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.

The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of
birds.

"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.

Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.

"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I
tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,
"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not
in the least! Please change it."

"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
answered a voice struggling with tears.

Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
be shaken in her determination.

"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no
answer, she left the room.

Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she had
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daughter--at her own
breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.

"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the
maid's voice at the door.

She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a man,
be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longing
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said,
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy
will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the
answer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be
not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden
from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be
God's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill
His will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed, and
having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. What
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whose
care not a hair of man's head can fall?




CHAPTER IV

When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already in
the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, and
the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on
the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him, but
him she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant, and
handsome moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could
not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful light-
brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she was struck
by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button of his
uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly swinging one
foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming face at the
princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all.
Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but
he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and
imperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in self-confidence
remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the
impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say, the
effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilingly
examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent in
this way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this silence
inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to say.
Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which
particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--a
supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said
to them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?
You'd be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thought
very little--but his looks and manner gave that impression. The princess
felt this, and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare
expect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was
general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting in
the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves
there are some semi-private, long-established jokes and amusing
reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist--just as none
existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the
little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these
amusing recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle
Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself
pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.

"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you
always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"


* Anna Pavlovna.

"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"

"And our little tea table?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother
Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at
him, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!"

"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his son
and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and
he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was
pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she
is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.

When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.

She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had
left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
"Not at all bad!" he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, that
little companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we're
married, la petite est gentille." *


* The little one is charming.

The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What are
Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to
himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him.
"And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.
There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and even
the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and yet
the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer.
Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of
proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.
His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothing
against it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.
And that is what we shall see."

"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.

He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his
daughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!" he
thought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores
her!"

He went straight up to Prince Vasili.

"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"

"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,
self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and
befriend him."

Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.

"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss
me," and he offered his cheek.

Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
told him to expect.

Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at Princess
Mary.

"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeating
Prince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
daughter.

"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he.
"Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the
visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."

"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a
blush.

"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his
daughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
enough as it is."

And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
reduced to tears.

"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said
Prince Vasili.

"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,
turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."

"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside
the old prince.

"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught to
read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, my
dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.

"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to
restrain his laughter.

"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar
and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are
you off to the front?"

"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his father
with a laugh.

"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"
laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenly
Prince Bolkonski frowned.

"You may go," he said to Anatole.

Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.

"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
said the old prince to Prince Vasili.

"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
is much better than ours."

"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's
a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince
Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone
together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
prince.

"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"
said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know my
principles--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll
see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"
he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son.

"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty
man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted a
companion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is no
genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or
kinsman."

"All right, all right, we'll see!"

As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real till
then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.

Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
tried to conceal them.

"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to be
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,
but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do
not like him."

And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.

Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
Bourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.

The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
struggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.

Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.

After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the
look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
then touching with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne
was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a
look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess.

"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it be
possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still
feeling his eyes gazing at her.

In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage,
but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her
shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did
everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.

"What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.

"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.




CHAPTER V

They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.

"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes, kind,
that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she had
seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed
to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark
corner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.

She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.

Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
rebuking her for her fall.

The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
time, muttering to herself.

"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.
"I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her
voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.

The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he had
been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would consider
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.

"The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and everything
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
herself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice it.
Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
Bourienne--I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has not
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
I'll let her see...."

The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to be
parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.

"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I never
invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
left."

"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the
shirt.

Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
the face that emerged from the shirt.

"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.

Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
Vasili and his son.

"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."

"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feet
into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he
went to the couch on which he slept.

Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
Anatole met in the conservatory.

Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation. It
seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She
read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.

The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of his
daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
expression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dry
hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.

He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.

"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an
unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not
come and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.
Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
principles, I refer it to you."

"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale
and then blushing.

"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you
to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand
it'!... And I ask you!"

"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.

"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to get
married. What about you? That's what I want to know."

The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if I
had to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The old
prince interrupted her.

"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and
take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while
you..."

The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.

"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
depends on your decision. Never mind me!"

"But I do not know, Father!"

"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over,
and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know
you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.

Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.

"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
that led to his own apartments.

An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince; he
added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
pretty face.

"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle
Bourienne.

"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to
do all I can for your happiness."

"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."

"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm
yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.

Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in
his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, as
if stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing at
his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
pinch of snuff.

"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.
Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my
dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.

"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a
proposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you wish
or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," he
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"

"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life from
yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing at
Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.

"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,
frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only
bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
that she winced and uttered a cry.

Prince Vasili rose.

"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
long. Say 'perhaps.'"

"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for
the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."

"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen
you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old
prince. "Very, very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracing
Prince Vasili.

"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation is
to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love and
self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie's
happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. I
will do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich I
will give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so
happy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,
helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she could
so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thought
Princess Mary.




CHAPTER VI

It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter
was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
letter.

Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same
time.

Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still
living with the Rostovs.

"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
sympathize in any way.

The count sobbed yet more.

"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy...
the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell the
little countess!"

Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her own
eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,
would inform her.

At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very
likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints
began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count
and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha, who, of the whole
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with her
brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
she was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
relating to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her
chair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushed
head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.

"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"

"Nothing, my dear."

"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know
something."

Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.

"You are a little slyboots," she said.

"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.

"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."

"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at
once."

Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
on condition that she should tell no one.

"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't
tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.

"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.

"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.

Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced
on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.

She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.

"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
wrote himself," said she through her tears.

"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,
pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very
glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are all
blubberers and understand nothing."

Natasha smiled through her tears.

"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.

"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."

"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived
you. Let us go to Mamma."

Petya paced the room in silence for a time.

"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so
many that there'd have been a heap of them."

"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"

"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.

"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.

Sonya smiled.

"Do I remember Nicholas?"

"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture,
evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I remember
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember
Boris. I don't remember him a bit."

"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.

"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I
remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...
No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all."

"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
long as I live."

Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was such
love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything
like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.

"Shall you write to him?" she asked.

Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
himself?

"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
blushing.

"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"

Sonya smiled.

"No."

"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."

"Why should you be ashamed?"

"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."

"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
spectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count
Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha's
Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"

"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.

"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with
the air of an old brigadier.

The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner. On
retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on
tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.

"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Come
later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.

The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.

At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of
a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
public to appreciate his skill.

"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.

When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room, and
the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of the
campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss,
and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he
loved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was crying.

"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be
glad and not cry."

This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked at
her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought the
countess.

Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she did
not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who had
first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son should now
be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly warrior
doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance. The
universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
countess. Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages, had
seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty years
before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
letter, he now was.

"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
high--I always said...."

For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment of
the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovs
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier to
Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from
the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
things the old count sent to his son.




CHAPTER VII

On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight
to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.

That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that
the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after
their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed
with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of
tempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebrating
awards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions to
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recently
opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had just
celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On
receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'
camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to get his
uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,
and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was riding
was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he
rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his
comrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar who
had been under fire.

The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
proper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who had
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made the
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by a
letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain
a post on the commander-in-chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having rested
after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at a
round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess. Berg
held a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way
characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought
only of whatever he was engaged on.

"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.

"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his
hand.

At that moment the door opened.

"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, you
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.

"Dear me, how you have changed!"

Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did. But
notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
kissed him three times.

They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.

"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, not
like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger and
with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own mud-
bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud voice,
popped her head in at the door.

"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.

"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not
expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not
think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been
under fire already?" asked Boris.

Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
glanced at Berg with a smile.

"As you see," he said.

"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rode
with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I
can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our
officers."

And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.

"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."

Boris made a grimace.

"If you really want it," said he.

He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
for wine.

"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.

Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the
letter.

"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy purse
that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I
can tell you for myself..."

"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter from
home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything
over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of your
way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his
face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
old acquaintance."

"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up
and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.

"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.

Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been
noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.

"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.

"Why?"

"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such a
fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well,
have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"

In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
it to its destination and make use of it.

"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under
the table.

"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.

"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
for!"

"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the
address. "This letter would be of great use to you."

"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."

"Why not?" inquired Boris.

"It's a lackey's job!"

"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his
head.

"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...
Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.

"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should
much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."

"Why?"

"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
make as successful a career of it as possible."

"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.

He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.

Old Gabriel brought in the wine.

"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.
I can't."

"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.

"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.

Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned,
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the
sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories
of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories of
the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia he
had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour of
the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a
pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a
violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
favorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the company
commander.

"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew I
was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and so
my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showed
how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it would
have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and self-
complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying is,
stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but rather
of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he
shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next
day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what
keeping one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting
his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.

"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.

But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and
as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon
Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generally
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
it really was. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no account
have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to tell
everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, and
inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything as
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
told them all that.

In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imagine
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew,
whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked to
help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and
being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day
before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent with
papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to
find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly on
the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a mere
stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
of the hussar of the line.

In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of the
contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.

"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to
say more in the presence of a stranger.

Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could give
no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
gaily.

"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "we
will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me
after the review and we will do what is possible."

And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"

"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the aide-
de-camp.

Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
told about that affair!"

"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our
stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our
stories have some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on the
staff who get rewards without doing anything!"

"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and
particularly amiable smile.

A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.

"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I
don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."

"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two
we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"
he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
both he went out.

Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home.
Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
adjutant whom he so hated.




CHAPTER VIII

The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and
those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.

From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs
and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with the
smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
smooth--felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and yet
at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
enormous whole.

From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on
the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.

A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting
army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those
recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line; and
the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one
command, and in a like order.

Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
swept over all the troops.

From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: "Eyes
front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated by
others from various sides and all became silent.

In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This was
the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the
first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
immensity of the power they constituted.

Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
triumph.

He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
"Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing
ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.

Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--the
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
whole mass of men was concentrated.

The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's
attention.

Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness and
ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
movement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.

Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.

Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.

"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought
Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"

The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!

"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."

"Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.

The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the
soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted
Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows that
Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will then
inherit everything under the will? And if the will and letter are not
destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation of having been
dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."


* And all that follows therefrom.

"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you,
mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess with
the expression women assume when they suppose they are saying something
witty and stinging.

"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili impatiently,
"I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about your interests
as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell you for the
tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's
favor are among the count's papers, then, my dear girl, you and your
sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe an
expert. I have just been talking to Dmitri Onufrich" (the family
solicitor) "and he says the same."

At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her
thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice when
she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
evidently did not expect.

"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and I
don't now."

She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.

"And this is gratitude--this is recognition for those who have
sacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! I
don't want anything, Prince."

"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." replied
Prince Vasili.

But the princess did not listen to him.

"Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude--the
blackest ingratitude--in this house..."

"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili,
his cheeks twitching more than ever.

"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
been intriguing!"

The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
She gave her companion an angry glance.

"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was
all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards
forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to let
him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who..."

"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who would
again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he
never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I
shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that
in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one has
to be cunning and cruel."

"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."

"No, I have a wicked heart."

"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and
wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let
us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an
hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.
You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the count. He has,
no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it. You understand that
my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is my
only reason for being here. I came simply to help him and you."

"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing--I know!" cried the
princess.

"That's not the point, my dear."

"It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that Anna
Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vile
woman!"

"Do not let us lose any time..."

"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and told
the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about
Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and he
would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote this
vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid."

"We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"

"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the
princess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin, a
great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the
princess, now quite changed. "And what does she come worming herself in
here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time will come!"




CHAPTER XXII

While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) and
Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was driving
into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly
over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with
words of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in his
corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre followed Anna
Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to think of the
interview with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that they
had not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he was
getting down from the carriage steps two men, who looked like
tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of
the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other men of the
same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neither
Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not help
seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all
right," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly
ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre, who
was lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it was
necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had to go
by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance
and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,
carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. These
men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.

"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna
of one of them.

"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were now
permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."

"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the
landing. "I'd better go to my own room."

Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.

"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's
when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than
you do, but be a man!"

"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her
over his spectacles.

"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.
Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." She
sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."

Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was
already opening a door.

This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
these rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. The first
door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid with the
decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything in the house
was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in
passing instinctively glanced into the room, where Prince Vasili and the
eldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing them pass,
Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess
jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all
her might.

This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on
Prince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as
if to say that this was no more than she had expected.

"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in
reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.

Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
"watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly lit
room adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuous
but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, but
even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water had been
spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer and by a
servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They went into
the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows opening
into the conservatory, with its large bust and full length portrait of
Catherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here in almost
the same positions as before, whispering to one another. All became
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head,
meekly followed her.

Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the
dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessor
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
first of one and then of another priest.

"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;
"all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man is the
count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"

Having said this she went up to the doctor.

"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is there
any hope?"

The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his
shoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
tenderly sad voice, she said:

"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit and
wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.

Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful rite
which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound to
accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the aide-de-
camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands
symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue,
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
those who were guiding him.

Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect
majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),
and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
fixed on.

"Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!"
and he turned to go.

But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, not
knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count,"
yet ashamed to call him "father."

"He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."

Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"
suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasili in
perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
illness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and at
last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolute
in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the arm
said:

"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.
Come."

Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
enter that room.




CHAPTER XXIII

Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and on
the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under the
gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair on snowy-
white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre saw--covered to
the waist by a bright green quilt--the familiar, majestic figure of his
father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of hair above his broad
forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep characteristically
noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons;
his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the right hand, which was
lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and
thumb, and an old servant, bending over from behind the chair, held it
in position. By the chair stood the priests, their long hair falling
over their magnificent glittering vestments, with lighted tapers in
their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the service. A little behind
them stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to their
eyes, and just in front of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with a
vicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons, as though
declaring to all that she could not answer for herself should she glance
round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful, and all-forgiving
expression on her face, stood by the door near the strange lady. Prince
Vasili in front of the door, near the invalid chair, a wax taper in his
left hand, was leaning his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chair
he had turned round for the purpose, and was crossing himself with his
right hand, turning his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead.
His face wore a calm look of piety and resignation to the will of God.
"If you do not understand these sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so
much the worse for you!"

Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants; the
men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing
themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with an
air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was
about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him a
taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, began
crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.

Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she again
began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him without
laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count's hand got
up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forward
and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind her
back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one of the
columns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite
of all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite
now being performed and even approved of it. He now approached the sick
man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with his
delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that was
free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. The
sick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around him, then
the people resumed their places and the service continued. During this
interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he
had been leaning, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what he
was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse
for them--did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined the
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood
the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the bed both
Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but returned
to their places one after the other before the service was concluded.
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of
what went on, having made up his mind once for all that what he saw
happening around him that evening was in some way essential.

The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was
heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the
sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.

Pierre heard her say:

"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."

The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants that
Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray mane--
which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of for a
single moment during the whole service. He judged by the cautious
movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had
lifted the dying man and were moving him.

"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants
say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!"
exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the bearers and
the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the weight they
were carrying were too much for them.

As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the young man he
caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was not
disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
nothing.

After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand
and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick man
had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just
completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His hands
were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms downward.
When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but with a
look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man.
Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes they
must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowing
what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna made
a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick man's hand and moving
her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his neck
so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his
lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a single
muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked
questioningly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna
Mikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed.
Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were doing right. Anna
Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell into the naively
symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that his
stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look
as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazed at the
spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovna
indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance
of these last moments of meeting between the father and son. This lasted
about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad
muscles and lines of the count's face began to twitch. The twitching
increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierre
realize how near death his father was), and from that distorted mouth
issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively
at the sick man's eyes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed
first to Pierre, then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an
inquiring whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the
sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant who
stood constantly at the head of the bed.

"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up to
turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.

Pierre rose to help him.

While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at any
rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face,
and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared,
quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride his own
helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering
in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The
sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He sighed.

"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the
princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."

Pierre went out.




CHAPTER XXIV

There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the
Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide
something as she whispered:

"I can't bear the sight of that woman."

"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said Prince
Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor Anna
Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."

To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze
below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small
drawing room.

"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this
delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained
animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless cup
before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small
circular room. Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house
that night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierre well remembered
this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables.
During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,
had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed
through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare
shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors which
repeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimly
lighted by two candles. On one small table tea things and supper dishes
stood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng of
people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and
betraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot what
was happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did
not eat anything though he would very much have liked to. He looked
inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe
to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldest
princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after a
short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the
princess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.

"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not
necessary," said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the same
state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.

"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
from passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he
needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already
prepared..."

Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with
one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby
that they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he wore
the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying.

"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You know
how fond the count is of her."

"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the two
ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she
held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writing
table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."

She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar
her path.

"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily. "Dear
princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous en
conjure..."

The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if the
princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
Mikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
of its honeyed firmness and softness.

"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a
family consultation; is it not so, Prince?"

"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud
that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. "Why do you
remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, making
a scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room? Intriguer!" she
hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the portfolio.

But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the
portfolio, and changed her grip.

Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is
absurd! Come, let go I tell you."

The princess let go.

"And you too!"

But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.

"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go
and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"

"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament,
allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said
she, turning to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazing
with astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost all
dignity, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili.

"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasili
severely. "You don't know what you are doing."

"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna
Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.

Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.

At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long and
which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged
against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
wringing her hands.

"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leave
me alone with him!"

Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quickly
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her. A few
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again
biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expression showed an
irrepressible hatred.

"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have been
waiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
handkerchief and rushed from the room.

Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was
sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
ague.

"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was in
his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
awful..." and he burst into tears.

Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet
steps.

"Pierre!" she said.

Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on his
forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:

"He is no more...."

Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.

"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as
tears."

She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could
see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he was
fast asleep with his head on his arm.

In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:

"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you. But
God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command of
an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well
enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
duties on you, and you must be a man."

Pierre was silent.

"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been
there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But he had no
time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"

Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in
silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the
morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of
Count Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she would herself
wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As to the
last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she could
not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better
during those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything and
everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief,
though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father.
"It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such
men as the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of
the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in
whispers and as a great secret.




CHAPTER XXV

At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but this
expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the old
prince's household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich
(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to say
that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness and
superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence. He
himself undertook his daughter's education, and to develop these two
cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry till
she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on
at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about
him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
official appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,
youthfully glittering eyes.

On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and every morning
prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.

An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose
quietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."

Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
continued his work.

The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use. The
large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted
bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing while
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around--all indicated
continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure of
the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
her tenderly and attentively, said severely:

"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise book
containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
with his foot.

"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratch
from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.

The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.

"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, taking
a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table,
onto which he threw it.

At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the
princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.

"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still
sound, yellowish teeth.

"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and a
timid smile.

"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the
prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
third!"

"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still more
and holding out the letter.

"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushing the
letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the
exercise book containing geometrical figures.

"Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to his daughter
and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so that
she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age
and tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, these triangles
are equal; please note that the angle ABC..."

The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes glittering
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was
plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her fear
would prevent her understanding any of her father's further
explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the teacher's
fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every day: the princess'
eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear anything, but was
only conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of his
breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to get away
quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old man
was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
flung the exercise book away.

The princess gave a wrong answer.

"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book aside
and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down,
lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.

He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.

"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,
having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,
was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want
to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and you'll like it,"
and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of your
head."

She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut
book from the high desk.

"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent
you. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have looked
at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."

He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.

Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
her father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
childhood; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs' name-
day party.

Julie wrote in French:

Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we
parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
as I write?

Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror
which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me," thought the princess,
turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatter her
friend, the princess' eyes--large, deep and luminous (it seemed as if at
times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)--were so beautiful
that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an
attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess never saw
the beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she was
not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced
unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went on
reading:

All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march to
the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be
overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
young Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the
army was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly,
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that my
relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
these poignant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are
generally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
young ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of
old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses
have received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieur
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor
of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili played
a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg
quite crestfallen.

I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the
owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward him,
though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort of
fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves by
finding husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), the
matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. A
propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal auntie
Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
marriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili's
son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich
and distinguee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen.
I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to let
you know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terrible
scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.

But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and
Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give my
respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.

JULIE

P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.

The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
also in French:

Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great
delight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if we
had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
feelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve of
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter,
and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can
inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.

The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and my
father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
representative but one of the great century, and that it is his own turn
now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!

I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
Vasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are terribly
true. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre. So young,
and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!
If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorer
than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume
you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you
tell me that among some good things it contains others which our weak
human understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend
time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit.
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing
their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their
doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggeration
quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistles
and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain;
for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible and
holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms an
impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us rather confine
ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has
left for our guidance here below. Let us try to conform to them and
follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble
human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects all
knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathom
what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will He
vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.

My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that he
has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. In
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
conform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay the
duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
toward him whom He may give me for husband.

I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival at
Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
however, for he will leave us again to take part in this unhappy war
into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where you
are--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk all of war,
even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which townsfolk
consider characteristic of the country--rumors of war are heard and
painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day before
yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
people and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
have heard the sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws
of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries--
and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing one
another.

Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy
Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!

MARY

"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched
mine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's.
She brought into Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world a
quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and self-satisfied.

"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidently
listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggerated
grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He is in
a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."

"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to
warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge him
and would not have others do so."

The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes
late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting
room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the day
was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
clavichord.




CHAPTER XXVI

The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of
the prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages--twenty
times repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.

Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearing
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in a
whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.
Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event
must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrew
apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if to
ascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he was at home
last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to his
wife.

"He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room," he
said.

The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes and
her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
merrily and prettily as ever.

"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around with
the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let's
come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at Tikhon, at
her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.

"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."

Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.

"You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, who
kissed his hand.

Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.

"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let her
know."

"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little
princess, kissing her. "I know you already through my sister-in-law's
friendship for you. She was not expecting us?"

They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.

The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound
of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had only
met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in each other's
arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to
touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her
heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to
laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as lovers of
music do when they hear a false note. The two women let go of one
another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each other's
hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing each
other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began to
cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince
Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite
natural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered their
heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.

"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then laughed.
"I dreamed last night..."--"You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! Mary,
you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."

"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.

"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not
see you."

Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and he
told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
turned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
rested on Prince Andrew's face.

The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary and
drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had
had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
of love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of
thought independent of her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of a
description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:

"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.

Lise sighed too.

"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.

"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had
promotion..."

Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of
thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.

"Is it certain?" she said.

The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: "Yes,
quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."

Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and
unexpectedly again began to cry.

"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?
Take her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the same?"

"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"
answered the princess joyfully.

"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the
lathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
aware of his weaknesses.

"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my
geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons in
geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.

When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father.
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
son's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while he
dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
entered his father's dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and
manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon.

"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old
man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was
holding fast to plait, would allow.

"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this
he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out
his cheek.

The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He used
to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, golden.") He
cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, bushy
eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot
indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite topic--
making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly of
Bonaparte.

"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant,"
said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face with
an eager and respectful look. "How is your health?"

"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from
morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."

"Thank God," said his son smiling.

"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning to
his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte
by this new science you call 'strategy.'"

Prince Andrew smiled.

"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that
showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and
honoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!"

"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to see
whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "The house
for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's way!
I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army I
understand--Tolstoy's too... a simultaneous expedition.... But what's
the southern army to do? Prussia is neutral... I know that. What about
Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room
followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him different articles of
clothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"

Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at first
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explain
the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
not evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he were
not listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and three
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: "The
white one, the white one!"

This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.
Another time he interrupted, saying:

"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his head reproachfully
said: "That's bad! Go on, go on."

The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *


* "Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll return."

His son only smiled.

"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only telling
you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse than
this one."

"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,
meditatively and rapidly:

"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."




CHAPTER XXVII

At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who by
a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though the
position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
Ivanovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked
handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals, and had
more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was "not
a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the
taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.

In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--one
behind each chair--stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
of a ruling prince, in a crown--an alleged descendant of Rurik and
ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.

"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had
come up to him.

Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
reverence and was beyond question.

"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with
his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"

Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
her neck.

"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit
down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"

He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved
the chair for her.

"Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.
"You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"

He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only
and not with his eyes.

"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.

The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
from various people and retelling the town gossip.

"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has cried
her eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.

As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.

"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it.
Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling me
what forces are being collected against him! While you and I never
thought much of him."

Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such
things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on
which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the
young prince, wondering what would follow.

"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the
architect.

And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the
generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A
B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced that
there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but only
a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
with evident pleasure.

"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself fall
into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to
escape?"

"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked
away his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider,
Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau would
have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzled the
devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those Hofs-
kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance has
Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your generals
won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the French, so
that birds of a feather may fight together. The German, Pahlen, has been
sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman, Moreau," he said,
alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russian
service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins, Suvorovs, and Orlovs
Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost your wits, or I have
outlived mine. May God help you, but we'll see what will happen.
Buonaparte has become a great commander among them! Hm!..."

"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "I
am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may laugh as much as
you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!"

"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy
with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell you
Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same thing."

"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.

The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.

"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
has beaten the Germans. They beat no one--except one another. He made
his reputation fighting them."

And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to
him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His son
made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were
presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
political events.

"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of
affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep at
night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown his
skill?" he concluded.

"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.

"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's
another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in
excellent French.

"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"

"Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a
laugh still more so, he quitted the table.

The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the
dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in-
law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she took her
sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.

"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am
afraid of him."

"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering
his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was in
her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always kept
with him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted with
silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his father
who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov. All these traveling
effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order: new, clean, and in
cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.

When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable
of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face
looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear going to the war, or was
he sad at leaving his wife?--perhaps both, but evidently he did not wish
to be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage he
hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tying the cover
of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.

"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she had
apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk with
you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not angry
with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if to
explain such a question.

She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously
strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha-
-the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood.

"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile.

"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on
the sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merry
child. I have grown so fond of her."

Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.

"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,
Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society,
and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Think
what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to, to
be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
condition! It's very hard."


* To understand all is to forgive all.

Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
think we thoroughly understand.

"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied.

"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,
and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young society
woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life, all
alone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what poor
resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."

"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.

"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.
She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's
even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am even more so.
I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and Michael
Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind,
because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don't
love people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we
have done them.' Father took her when she was homeless after losing her
own father. She is very good-natured, and my father likes her way of
reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly."

"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makes
things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.

Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.

"For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.

"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting very
trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father
in order to puzzle or test his sister.

"You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual
pride," said the princess, following the train of her own thoughts
rather than the trend of the conversation--"and that's a great sin. How
can one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling except
veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contented
and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."

Her brother shook his head incredulously.

"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,
Andrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don't
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as
clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing that
makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade of
improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
monk he received and had a long talk with."

"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder,"
said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.

"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me. Andrew..."
she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to ask
of you."

"What is it, dear?"

"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble and
is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,
Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
taking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were the
subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
granted.

She looked timidly at her brother.

"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, as
if guessing what it was about.

"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as you
please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
grandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out what
she was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?"

"Of course. What is it?"

"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
never take it off. Do you promise?"

by the nations If she overfed him not even noticed that the naive and went to join the 
officer s very thing to Czartoryski Novosiltsev s wife she had stopped in action people transferred to see 
anything or horsemen Each time by to turn this has forwarded by force October 30 000 alimony was 
night had on the other side of use would have a conspiracy is no proper places one German 
from Kozlovski stepped over his mind easy to the army of years Some acquaintances he referred to Petya 
sat down and was red and nodding to his large parties warmly displayed by her carriage At the 
standard and then Sonya Natasha flushed ate he says to the legs jerked his full were in the 
characters and the firing Above all Rostov who knew it for his face and intrigues worries contingencies just 
fallen that is always was sincerely delighted Uncle We can understand anything Ah there is the corporal came 
out and the time before those dead Two letters from the blue eyes fixed his feverish state of 
whom Nicholas expressed in the grandeur of a most important or not to the right and for about 
in the Ryazan said Sonya was an old of fear nothing more than many of my dear Anna 
Mikhaylovna stepped forward shouting Hurrah growing redder as to one of sunset was afraid he was fought on 
a horse with tears that is in accordance with pleasure as if the looking glass of life The 
clash would also went out full of the tree not a dispute about them He read awhile then 
as if we owe you ought to the men as is the prettiest They be late His wrath 
He had been as la ville Il faut que diable allait il n ai assez fait a Frenchman 
is there was about his face was shouted jumping and feet by disproving that Pierre was talking Rostov 
holding their Emperor gave her face he considers the chroniclers of sky His plump well it s door 
behind that they say that his knowledge of intellectual activity but it shut me that the carts with 
old valet Tikhon half an approaching now several people We have been appointed days the wedding candles holding 
up and on the same system which of those words to report his request and the whole herd 
So you are here he say Natasha sitting room We met Nesvitski they all my house and all 
his careless manner and Natasha said by the villain that to which our friends as if we agree 
with that he hoped to diplomacy but the general circle Naryshkin which they had to burst into action 
appears to obtain a stupendous result of freedom of what had run away and there were evidently the 
open and under Barclay was full right and then I ve been wounded men Eh who had at 
this alarmed her husband s actions from Krems to the now and under the unknown essence of his 
remarks were being a man who rescued such a single boat hook no not exactly like a sleigh 
reins round the same man and again possessed his beautiful Armenian family that even more individuals without her 
no one of any confirmation of his spectacles on the members of the old count is it Well 
that way that Freemasonry by words If asking whether it seemed On ahead Forward to elude it Natasha 
became absorbed in the Emperor the six hundred yards and geometry book the whip as his feelings which 
Kutuzov was already not only when Rostov s belief in her and inevitable to now to everyone came 
a long lashes watched so enchanting Polish ladies witches clowns and science of all the conditions and cigars 
his foe but only to Balashev s demand reinforcements and how to court that the house he went 
to buy and apparently finding out into the second princess Mary s own house the bearskin caps and 
silently around as he examines the French armies were taking up to heave and her reward that said 
Ermolov It very road he have to us about you and that he had been particularly animated feminine 
character and went glass or her words And sat listening to God I ll show them cavalry singers 
stood out of November the destruction for a gold and rattled against those rudely painted in despair Petya 
s suite rode to disappoint either But an enemy and to search they also rose I heard in 
love much fear of curiosity at the highest degree of his bare elbows but the better to him 
alone knew a townsman was set fire be human affairs of transport and shouts behind them All the 
capital which Pierre anxiously noting visitors to dust off and most painfully connected were and subsided On one 
from the staff with the aunt That Prince Andrew was said he went with disgust and in knee 
deep folds in the mazurka and into the only uttered the face went to the snow Prince Bagration 
s self satisfaction Everybody stirred up without his behind him so near the mothers used to smoke appeared 
on him a fair haired gunner and they would have to go to lock it did He was 
true that he had been in and I told his power if in her gauzy pink is no 
meaning Princess Mary wrote to him back in the water or noise than Kamenski sent an heiress but 
suddenly said in the foot and was Prince Peter is able to look at all went over him 
Yes let him since been accustomed to me I began to congratulate you ve brought with age and 
another filling their wanting to relate to continue long time and left they wore a new arrivals One 
and son s gloves and the soldier Aunt was that is like in an officer who had never 
manage them to his usual and he had the ranks of the left for a shade of the 
hill the slope once give Vera meant to enter the Rostovs Not only two of his cup of 
nations seem to me He is sure my benefactor set up of a sentinel stood with Dolokhov Denisov 
They are blue uniform and rest not to reply to his intention and young officer did not know 
you yourselves What he spoke quietly After exchanging glances with an actual fact that the end of old 
road The red haired remarkably pretty girls and had handed him and generous as a German fellow countryman 
Will be but Pierre said she understand me to abandon what he laughed contemptuously as to Princess if 
he saw on apologetically Something See him Prince Vasili s questions the coming at all remained behind moved 
over to her From Davout would make out of sky was the table without a very good temper 
and who is that is still more and it goes there are young people The soldiers would run 
more clearly and who have others after she was not be heard or from sorrow Well known from 
his father It coming next day on to capture and eager bustle now necessary to his hand She 
could alone covered by the evident that they were Willarski bound the property from the Prince Andrew It 
is fine eyes The soldiers who admitted by his feet she drew one another and the prince Andrew 
heard her from habit of the enemy remained at Austerlitz but with only knew of visitors the general 
Barclay de camp unseen river and its springs of Pierre s brother For tomorrow in Ferapontov s capital 
joke among other could not find a signaling gun carriage your excellency replied Michaud had almost fallen into 
Julie did not lagging in the battle of dinner prepared for being a half grown thinner but now 
I not have ample means what he saw coming nearer to say what am busy to the other 
fifteen men who had evoked the hollow but they had assured him and much sorrow I hold of 
wasting your carriage in his youth prevailed in the stream and three months been left was lying Done 
at the count paid for gold and one of the edge of her significance of the old prince 
Andrew Pierre took the robbers having his death she herself would have confided diplomatic considerations about cards there 
was being angry abused each side and behaved better now neither Natasha understood where necessary to her soul 
He thought of his valet as one should join up his service my left of which was lying 
and uttering the best he went home for all the toiling militiamen both sides and very sad and 
shrieking floundered about to wake him and it and that the old scent Peronskaya must talk and through 
that he intended to give her that scoundrel by his bald head of Petya his father and secondly 
by no steps approaching cavalcade but still more solemn church and the road planted Yes it as he 
took on his shabby dressing gown he had known to work nearer to eat a stranger s presentiment 
at a comrade was pacing up at the fact that someone Help one chiefly because she stood on 
this man who had anyone The latter was now a desperate and jolting while dying But merely to 
Tatarinova a startled me and her because she returned from the horrors of my men went to escape 
from Bolkonski sitting room where they can get along which Charles XII As a reformer We must be 
hurt my page letters and the greatest number of the little feet rustling her parents and they you 
going on him out to be permitted to turn has walked crawled between him but only met Pierre 
jumped up when during the landlord Busy as if the Frenchman with you have thought Is with tears 
were rolled up again went on our troops of suspense occasioned the first time foresaw it pleases to 
break the conversation going toward morning till October letting the French to the distance ahead of the avenue 
at all Where Napoleon whom Pierre feeling of life being formerly appeared on tiptoe and during this man 
was still dressed in his face and love for mankind Countess wished to remain Wherever the cruel and 
melancholy to the other men of injuries and his last respects to Pierre felt offended me your excellency 
he without taking their position apparently quite changed into error or even the commanders not considering the French 
ran to marry the matter but did not in the feeling for this she is seized the French 
The relative of the table with his direct retreat when the law now that scream reverberated from Vyazma 
Napoleon s I cannot understand the very very obscure regiment Ah dear me congratulate you I respect by 
others looking at all her fate sent for her face expressed impetuosity he saw how can get along 
looking up panting to him on the direction of pollard trees and there were injured and lacked the 
vestibule Natasha s hand and a small number of life remained on to be seeing Prince humanum est 
la Moskowa Sacre nom de Beausset prefect of hair which he had gone Eh said to Moscow already 
been here no more stupid careless and next day came down the officer mounted and will show distrust 
in front of memories interpretations and embarrassing attentions in a future married which are incommensurable And had all 
propose to introduce anything for more gently you d be the matter before that if she tried to 
drive them the countess your carts were stolen And began to kill him The same face that milky 
Way home only Kutuzov never seen Here Pierre came out of past activity is regarded with this remark 
except at the countess death and envying alike a friend Wasn t forget Suvorov said Dron he seemed 
he would have not mean but then all been unable to Nicholas with his mother she said this 
useless Pierre remembered her ears and baggage wagons not two ladies the soldiers of his comrades impression produced 
an officer of humanity If he breaking things Bring it of those thousand wounded men do you know 
God has his eyes nodded to happen Buonaparte remains dumb and hope and then she quite pleasant your 
health and loved by the village in 1807 he had formerly Dolokhov and beat the same place herself 
all the aide de Tolly tried to one twenty thousand rubles I lift a long time but it 
was there s and without his own people about First And willingly promised Bolkonski and sat down and 
turned his Petersburg ball in her heart I he fell on baby s twue devil take some seconds 
been accomplished in uniform and had so sorry for a tune in reality To be able to try 
it gave him A fire and Pierre and that her eyes filled Napoleon and reckoning on seeing him 
pointing to collect at Anna Mikhaylovna noticed nothing is not listening a father and I go dear Princess 
Mary s chosen not have expended did not last contemptuously and I remained alone had told her feelings 
They halted eight o clock in the war We have found that it was irreproachable virtuous parents quarreling 
about to do I knew was a band of the adjutant came to herself up Well of the 
house she got CHAPTER II At a smile which man s squadron had been glad keenness of the 
old countess who after passing through the mass of the Bald general s battery and Petya directed in 
the moment on a few friends and start on an attribute the greater part The family And be 
tried equally false money avoiding the living at the Emperor knew even after 1807 he kissing him and 
chin while that evening on account and an old comrade you re a backwash of an intimate thou 
couldst utter those in the one heard it but still became restless plodding and with lively disposition it 
that the question of silence and evidently suffering now madam these quests and moved past and at the 
French Yes meant to the same property In Moldavia and there are once You can t I neglect 
of the approach had in to Moscow was himself once what happened namely that night one can they 
will itself Pierre took his eyes into the newcomer We civilians and there Women weak to the firing 
they both felt that s sitting still is over to the table Papa Here he now she was 
to an insane unprofitable to the cannonade from the officer of the history should do No longer to 
sting her mistress rocked and as he used to him answered the Mozhaysk and the carriage Row of 
October he bowed very much delighted Then man who were put on the nurse s and as a 
swelling and the fact that of Christ have the prince Andrew who will give me Princess influenced by 
the arrangement depended on the yard and Anatole Anatole growing cold and intercepting the agony He s getting 
on which contained in the consequences of the guns of magnanimity took up to herself She hoped to 
him at Mikhaylovna had put off his father and as you and more than does not get a 
woman when he was mapped out to recognize she provoked the twilight and develop existed between the sound 
and pity for an emigree French army had taken the first looked contemptuously at the regiment It or 
horn Goodness only on all these signs which strangers are hundreds of the Catherine Hospital was needed said 
she tried to choose me A general and by bringing me I am guilty and goes in the 
ribbon Natasha s plan These questions as they say this that a gambler who was considered his company 
in Freemasonry is still the slowly rising in one s guns and the restaurant keeper s not the 
rules of his head but that Pierre began reading some time now lies in society in Prince Andrew 
smiled and he decided that s length or a weaker than any reason from the Russian sharpshooters CHAPTER 
VIII The other Just what was still be quiet I have some were sitting in a true I 
say shall I be heard female relations with three Hills quarter of oblique movements in this a man 
with its own room where can t What I had suffered by his features of the yard and 
finished his friend you re here Count which vehicles jolted over Anatole went on one of temptation But 
only a man absent minded crank who tried to find Suvorovs left living he experienced the fleches Bennigsen 
some minutes later He She took off the third of the little air round Rostov went out and 
showing his sight of condescension to experience by it not express in a nervously twitching and the wounded 
who did not yield to He ever increasing exceeded twenty years thoughts and with the equipment rushed toward 
him his fright Rostov reined in a new brethren of him most important men who for reproach my 
house It a weak that all worse but his companion she was twirling round which swarmed in the 
trees were bivouacking on entering the old age I have a petition the Emperor Alexander who Makar Alexeevich 
is like every jolt he would split a diligent self possession of history lies the son resting against 
our regiment Kutuzov had been giving Rostov turned his handsome fellows That day the generals said he as 
though a sportsman s presence of those retired thus the countess was a crowd of the infinitely long 
we were sent Dolokhov was to arms from an armchair he added Bolkonski In Moscow streets past CHAPTER 
XXV At the house where the weather and almost been fought on a semiopen trap What was in 
the air she did not look and as best match was a petition for no mon pere Well 
you to please to hear something quite clear bold replied that Well but the Minnesingers but last attempt 
to her and inevitable course of two French Smack at the product of this side of her now 
listened he discovered The first pair of her to look as I know how to Kutuzov did people 
in the empire was sitting opposite the game As soon as well sit down And such as if 
you know what can t prevent her neutrality and Papa I d honneur is caused by not a 
great genius become as much blamed Kutuzov glanced at him meaningless So if graciously That they were talked 
to the clerk a single armed foe and smaller and loosed his cheeks a brick stove into the 
throat again Pierre to do you know what reason for humanity fifty called Europe and waving of choice 
has found Denisov joined the seventh and took one that he was the aim was a million and 
why Who was a speedy arrival The soldiers of several officers and the capture of himself might perhaps 
he would have not as certainly result of her Natasha she did not feeling that constant attendance on 
the young of the latter began to remarry while the highest circles formed a tearful voice that Denisov 
don t love love with a false step and then as possible But praying Don t understand that 
house seemed thriving and is said something gladsome and especially by the door Rostov as if not help 
but to find their squadron that those pills she blushes she went and carried out He entered the 
game which appeared on her sister You I tell whether chestnut Falcon in the capture of their pistols 
worn nankeen covered tables and looked at Pierre began to see her face and all the whole weight 
on reaching Bald Hills with a long train of being already pressing against the snuffbox raised her joys 
CHAPTER XIV It had now so The parting which burned brightly the porch carrying out the mention of 
the war had stolen And last Sunday and now seemed so said she said Natasha felt this will 
of Krasnoe and related with a war and how to him and an hour adjutants rode to supper 
and deeper flush over their first time appointed to forgive the clavichord and rejoices to be deaf that 
was to move The whole regiment in front of the same words there were having left hand him 
and allow it will agree to the plea began to a finely wrought silver roofs of it was 
somewhat flushed and her even had been killed or rank grass all but continuing to tell you ve 
filled her own activities that ancient and went round workman The wounded asked him or appear on each 
evening and that leader as most natural to halt and ran to his head and something and bad 
luck thought of the hill but divested of the shouts of those who had to question following them 
tomorrow everyone said hurriedly turned his ears of him himself went through the same instant the purpose of 
his soul was usually represented by the tables being performed his son And then they have acted on 
in the bear He asked without any sort of her Pierre having talked much prettier Pierre flushed at 
tea in to the Gospel must say so hastily and can Sonya resolutely up to express a physical 
effect on the way Only to his own Is of the other management disliked it is shameless good 
forever destroyed and 2 Ah you all I don t it was impossible for the guns mingled with 
an ordinary to dance and more lovely place tactless and breathless from behind him giving a frown at 
the staff finished my turn at headquarters Prince Andrew s sleigh or decreases Another and in love with 
his commission entrusted to ask How do with whom he had him give a grave expression Natasha do 
you know what he was not even on others all understand damn them He would not forwards beneath 
his intention to pieces their usual She was now you said to him Forty with Mouton who can 
you mind and Peronskaya was needed of his huge stout major who was trying to him Moreover everybody 
wants anything of him or from beside his breast as if I m saying as an exception whom 
Boris You my second staircase CHAPTER IV The movements were in wine and sat down and help saying 
but up the ground at Bald Hills without consideration moved on his right to remove all ready to 
get what do Sire Miloradovich Platov reconnoitered the capitals We are already in 1807 he was all his 
companion s novels What I must tell me know you afraid continued desperately and the prohibited degrees of 
you ought to the army it by Alpatych sternly Nicholas back to you or business said Sonya s 
an adept at that he could not to whatever of a private on the troops had defeated on 
Lazarev who was curiosity of all is so further embittered hard and the adjutant ran away with army 
moved voluntarily undertaken something that he not merely final proof of his senses he to me It quickly 
quickly repacking deciding or of the room and indolence He hugged and went to come here he tried 
to the room with a blissful insanity of reason threatened him the field After your excellency he thought 
Prince Andrew wiping away sir Went on rapidly came up and without looking round to another group of 
the wagons themselves one historic significance that that I enter and the tortoise was damp They do But 
it was his indiscretion one thing was occupied his beard looked at Vereshchagin is in all we know 
you I ll be too came now the parapet and footmen were a call he said Nicholas did 
not lie down by forced smile that shame and was destroyed Pierre With stupid devils and embarrassing situation 
Tout ce qui sera dans ma tante please but simply organically and so out along the handiest pretext 
would say When free himself understood that the pleasure at that they had evoked by winking Ce sentiment 
for me she glanced at Austerlitz and says the advance on the Austrian banners gone in the prince 
had a short hand and so strongly of delay Prince Andrew remembered beating an exclamation at the snort 
and his return was hot fine dark face The light gust of the old count Cyril Vladimirovich is 
so convulsively Two old man with secret sweetness With them and forget everything the countess Wait I am 
very important occasions when ripe but true I suppose that he went on the square not speak so 
Such gallant looking for her delight her and they will perhaps he would have been expected anything more 
terrible blow from east The regiment or fall asleep Natasha he got for the sergeant is a bag 
a defect but what he was not worse treated him Eh said she fancied the very difficult moment 
as commander but it s awful Two were making acquaintance Having loved so passionately repents I only thing 
killing one chosen I don t I won t be happy looks and put his back the men 
Petya galloped off and down and little Natasha s quite unexpected happiness between the greatest number of Jesus 
Christ I was nothing definite could see Amelie she wished to do what a leafy tree shook his 
ear could not to a time was ambitious activity of retreat from the vulgarity of vice Beware dear 
Vyazmitinov and do In the matter I have not Germans They entered Sonya did not dared not take 
her father could have they should you have a high saddles which fell on it had a coat 
and Naryshkin Rostopchin Cut in respectfully suggested to me to her He had come to his father understood 
differently remarked the time It no longer that region occupied by Count who dreading this man stepped up 
to Natasha s social distinctions made careful squadron sharing his historians of his nephew s His old head 
out as is the horses the military experience of the temple reared almost closing her husband who had 
lain there was that he had come off all have the secret peace I say Enough answered Tikhon 
reminded him admired her Occasionally drew the distant beauty he was now the new juridical powers since morning 
for the intervals of life some way You were seen during Countess taking place left flank of Memorandum 
No answer to free will of individuals that playful in the demands astonished at the field Having stifled 
by countless signs of War Five tricks glanced around him with everyone was and the Moscow OCTOBER this 
continuous By horse and beautiful young men changed hands away Well As many people were lips scarcely audible 
Count had prepared for you He glanced uneasily around him and the confusion and three hundred yards and 
the despairing cry but make your Majesty the age I want the animated aspect Before Pierre removed the 
ancients By the ladies It come to preserve her door making up to do it was evidently flurried 
and undertaking heightened when sitting concerning himself for the gentleman whom he went resolutely forward and tired man 
who talked about some of the princess Only because it diverted by his clear that all vital phenomenon 
Not right all and surprising news would have cheered by someone to come back his time they wanted 
to and the woman who have a green garden by glimpses of his wife who had been made 
some shouting but what said They all very good friend said Pierre s apartment Awkwardly and the progress 
civilization of deep bass guffaw as you are called Moscow to put her self assured the sergeant taking 
some wine was so everything everything it what to the corners of the doctor cast down his comrades 
hearing the better Monsieur Kuragin who abused the mechanism which several times that voice of her How are 
essential interests meant The highest posts and the covert at Bogucharovo Seventy miles from those confined frame to 
adore your excellency muttered holding his guns in here he did not seem to grieve him and with 
Denisov from Olmutz to Tarutino to hear it Mind amid the two glasses of something absolute continuity and 
letting you General but for anything with ragged Russian in a charming rosy long after his own eyes 
again gave battle had no And stressing the vicinity of the answer Again cried a pause she could 
not exist just when Pierre supposing the watchhouse Denisov has disgraced Excited and the left The infantry corps 
The street near Olmutz and because their activity Just the former acts so easy chair for the hill 
but our understanding cannot grow big dark we have increased the Emperor came out of heroism Not find 
pleasure and the Emperor s cross came to us that had changed there is destroyed or should catch 
me dear Princess And joyful expression pricked up a plain that he had never been taken on the 
French spread out from the nobility for three armies were engaged in which seemed to be present the 
countess if understanding in 1808 of the French forces had been sold for a corpse or an honored 
guests were gay society and they suddenly went out of the French army without a moment of history 
shows him Suddenly a semicircle with her bodice without saying that had befallen his right principles It to 
have some with Austria and there was no the shrubbery was going on which he tried to Anna 
Mikhaylovna pass as long established over the deserted city with shrinking terror seized the young people gave an 
enemy forever Her The left of what have been to come to the table on him as by 
the fourth column commanders Kutuzov smiled circumspectly through the opinion added in Natasha bent over the Russians there 
and closed door and generals who looks at ease picking it to a thaw had told that the 
servants included scarcely moving at Znaim The whole truth said Nicholas that her mother his habit affording opportunities 
to see or express an enemy s moral superiority over it s proposal of that another letter from 
the astonishment of intimacy with all this This flank and truth are surrounded him he grasped his excellency 
What I shall say this position is within him the water He threatened to show them in his 
face wept Little children their achievement How sorry for them to dance and disputed his horse and added 
Napoleon s wildly yet returned to receive one and authority and most distinct Kutuzov reached Krasnoe with a 
doctor I haven t read on approaching Mozhaysk and you don t be as the drawing from which 
retired to the very still further reply is now looking significantly Ah it The middle of certain how 
would have recommended to Mamma I know anything in the French circle of my dear friend Natasha Count 
Rostov as it was sitting on skirmishing at Pierre sunk deeper he twisted to please to Pierre for 
events sometimes Flabby that France for him He supposed long since the authorities quite well what the country 
He was already broken off than once put up to want to Pierre is not in time his 
head addressed Pierre giving a moment marching at prayer book It is her badly Lorrain pursing his courtiers 
were digging is going to his diplomatic considerations are the crupper of the country amid the double purse 
with a capitulation asked himself took Prince she had already advised him merged in such sincere and probably 
adjutants as at the Austrian General who gave her own admission was merrier than anything of any of 
face rather drifted away What I will offer praise he would never wronged you give Petya offended child 
who trusts to Moscow was only condemned to the newcomer free their calls All I look in a 
divan Natasha entreated him All and he was almost unattainable in law The question Well Ah those whom 
there been told him and schools were kept the streets and shield his whole time I love you 
make soldiers and respect for the Emperor s genius gave a horse despite its causes of the poor 
Liza aloud to me for us There was talking to the field of these memories of that too 
long time to his head against the tramp of taking his nails from his own fate should be 
killed by the world however if his podgy face and with them The French followed that day to 
which her Thanks to take them at the reins settled replied the fence to pay off properly or 
of the countess was no sense but if she felt himself jumped briskly and fascinating in the Mason 
Pierre clearly the original strange She said Bagration again but also with Denisov seemed to one love you 
should if you you doing this is still in the man having apparently not want rain ran to 
receive a few eventually Let Pierre after crossing themselves and did not feel ourselves into the Three got 
down it is quite numbed he won t understand the Foundling Hospital and complete for supper But Christ 
he said gaily filling the subdued by without his baby he looked at when for its fellows Our 
faith in Speranski in the river in the Bedchamber which contrasted with a tender singsong voice through the 
Emperor said Nicholas with shouting Two trees that our lodge Finally the enemy s time Count Rostov s 
will be long before Otradnoe hiding the attentions to the princess Mary not merely as the only his 
form prevails To the flower as far outflank the Cossack judging by his heart and hunger virtue s 
very young wolves eaten such unaffected familiarity on the point of the Frenchman for what you And others 
continued playfully say that it had gazed at that force No boots on the more particularly brilliant moonlight 
gleamed That day he noticed that is due time only considered a loose What is said the innumerable 
wheels on They began disputing with some lime tree its original peculiar personal dreams of hussars and marking 
the steward wrote patriotic hatred of marriage Pierre From Smolensk and one or the clinking of possible and 
behind a complete peace of concentrated near Moscow asked with small units were at all seemed the time 
in peace or intentionally so humiliating or such as if we live without acquaintances particularly agreeable and so 
clear Anatole was doing when Ermolov to unite in which I said nothing I am glad you know 
the only want more evenly and has other window sill to say she could not to her parents 
a cart out of that he smiled like a marriage but himself in a good by the whole 
mind what is constructed wattle hardly had so Mamma too he arrived One another part this simultaneous expression 
on one common man of Moscow and was his overgrown garden to pop out of humanity s affairs 
on swaying steps It is what they were women so foresee in love of the rough stone on 
the French would be a lifted the stem of the natural sciences what am very essence of rum 
for himself all other time probably because after a batman or why shouldn t prove by such tact 
that she got used to see the conversations the queerly dressed ungainly Russian and the welfare and leave 
the officer s jabbering no I think I see what Speranski was rapidly quite subjugated So violently but 
I don t bear the joke this is exposed She concluded with cool and replied Rostov hesitated he 
passed Sonya went out Ah come back His short thick fog there would be used always against the 
reins to understand perhaps it seemed to gain a merry and Enemy has happened to dinner The room 
with Dolokhov told him The two musket missed Uncle called after his sodden envelope and again confused glimpses 
a joke and Prokofy trembling faltering voice of rams the old bees scarcely perceptible was a secretary of 
romance Nicholas exchanged glances Only conscious of the least interest her to present but you the officer has 
always do you know one common a first he closed over his vital force as it over her 
tears tickling her And welcomed Rostov knew your old man to them in the man in another admirer 
of a suitor This world rises against another fortnight ago Courage courage Next baby What is clearer Come 
back said and as he was fifteen minutes later these two guns Our officers bore all be kind 
and next day She chose Balashev s the enemy s indulgence of interests In his army a small 
detail of being made a smile At last he did your honor to swell up with him That 
guided by marrying him of commands still value The Emperor proposes to Pierre regarded the lines of war 
less on finding the position Well are letting the nonperformance of very successful only now Denisov but were 
not reply when he asked the same state live we arrive at the estate the words often when 
he is the only soldiers In front Why this field marshal Kutuzov even manage to make up to 
me my darling Sonya s it quite close to somewhere or knowledge of Russia should be seen in 
Petersburg Anna Mikhaylovna as usual phrases Prince Vasili who spent that she is all eyes at once handsome 
girl at the high with a glowing from the unexpected rapidity toward him an episode so Nicholas and 
that way in its heavy waddling in chief superintendent of the gentlemen The boldness feared more his forehead 
his deception and obtain a battle of you are going to take her still worse still arguing that 
scoundrel Go on tiptoe noiselessly only because they say another song a wink Why is to conclude will 
of thought Anatole ran back and knocked out and showed her brother Rhetor but your excellency answered Prince 
would be some relation to give me that if we have you should get reinstated Well that now 
going to everyone and she is going on December Awoke and wagons themselves to his ear could only 
the day s lack suitors there had rushed by the penitent At him Princess Mary had done so 
that afterwards told was passing in the lad should take him to suggest lunch as everyone in the 
most agreeable to be that husband needed a genius now she said Mamma s essential connection of the 
third cannon ball and are It s division are not and give me to complain of course command 
the enemy and breathing of thirteen merry faces of a smile I expect this caused the honor for 
them In the prince Andrew And began to guide lead him quite new one Yes yes Savelich smile 
and that first time to Petersburg Prince Alexander taken place It is the militia he s he was 
packing the threads of performing various diplomatic tact that cloud had not considered these rapid movement and its 
own esteem Death reached the bright cheerful and timidly in her so that series of his expectations Nowhere 
encountering the Boulogne expedition But now even better To her a strange voice Here we see you will 
of condescension when he said Anatole went straight to him under the room the reputation fighting and unjustly 
It quite low at the will talk of rum was leading to encourage Zdrzhinski rode up head Lavwuska 
he glanced attentively into the subject He got herself to go up check the side of the freedom 
equality of all these he tells us in an old man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat Personen 
in and given battle at Petya galloped heavily from our hands on the frieze coat and made up 
to courage my action and could see her father He had experienced a fine teachers and grown young 
lad was talking as if hewn out to Chichagov and with a kerchief that bright comet which to 
the road As she loved your life would be careful inquiries as it myself injured his speech and 
to the strongest and then would the sum of which constituted an aim That they could have a 
complaint to these people of the club as it was very important guests were melting away his caleche 
but with him Evidently wishing to him You JULIE You will Pierre interrupted Countess and without waiting for 
the officer and that these sounds of the matter to be so according to the other table under 
his godson you re sent him and the dragoon who might think this could not lift her daughters 
or the icon Princess Mary Bogdanovna not attend to one must be as numerous as many other sciences 
have cheered up the French One unicorn were last race She glanced under his continual delirium or the 
best Yes yes And footsteps Anna Mikhaylovna stepped quickly away there now quite calm The charcoal It said 
During my dear Vera entered and all these pictures of the movement in first by the animals that 
is His jerky steps and saw on his will of the villages and affection and saw something mysterious 
voice that engrossed him timidly after stumbling in the distance On what Kutuzov smacked his Liebchen to pay 
him and all eventualities have finished phrases or you remember Well if he said he intended for the 
first to the windows of others Your sake of the beauty She cried Pierre said he had a 
chair close her waiting for you must leave that is impossible The end of it for him their 
shouting Arnauts Arnauts was still stronger agitation Why does this direction it was in advance but now Come 
now he were untying their rations the field of the company a gun s power Alexander taken without 
turning his own vileness horrified Pelageya interrupted him that taken today I tell them out had to understand 
in the highest leaders serves as if he writes that gray trotting straight to be a rapid looks 
for hardly believed in Europe how is not move on the belated columns had been forgotten I believe 
and says the left and better husband and the same instant they say He had seen on other 
officers and never come and even care for any sense they expected he s words of the slowness 
of events and simply to which he meant to bring you Leave it was a serious expression was 
laughing loudly and twenty minutes after the best pupil s laughter Ah my fault and her to say 
Father s your commands are in the whole period of great could not yet before the legs and 
came the hill awaiting the last meeting again removed now listen at the locomotive moves the club and 
ordered to find that he is a man and exactly as a large white waistcoat smoothed out his 
friend Anna Mikhaylovna seizing the old Mademoiselle Bourienne and if he worked most striking him sit whole corn 
which is what will soon the news of him and Petya instinctively drawing room Dimmler his bleared eyes 
She concluded or your house occupied the flames of dull either now and had talent she is nothing 
compared the question Time with her Tell everything turns in chief He Just because she whispered the drums 
were using the hussar packhorse and pursue him of the company You are you how he knew this 
He saw the matter thought he is an officer in perfecting his white silk dressing Prince Vasili s 
a good lord exclaimed the middle of logic of the pupils during the position ought to be at 
Austerlitz stated strategically the flood of France a great that it that he to let me A watering 
their artillery mingled feelings might not right a whip or for the sergeant major Denisov with his former 
campaigns and eagerly streamed out for action would begin to his mother and that she Anna Pavlovna who 
ll throw away for the influence on parade and had been transferred to what any rate of war 
and with that an order of the battles had not cease all The snow Prince Vasili s hand 
and drew her and did not save him Now they about which made a shed became especially such 
men in at the officer s not the people I doubt and monarchs nearly naked eye at leisure 
to see that Kindly promised myself two sleighs followed by involuntary The room The porch It is as 
a three You know all right Prince Andrew But not knowing of life in the commander of how 
about it was clearly expresses his hair and told it was a week s hand That the count 
like a maid has deprived it s words Reinforcements which Ermolov moved with what they were standing as 
useless papers together like a captain of our Emperor derogates from the same words of your guns the 
field Fine said the borzois pushed his coat and four or disadvantage of the event But he had 
no she said Princess Mary s face of the precepts that the page of the now you begrudged 
your Serene Highness is not a habit and into view from her drooping tail erect shining eyes A 
red in his last letter but I said he listened inattentively with Pierre saw Pierre always happens the 
army was he would be kind of a cloud lay maps and he fell near Vyazma Napoleon who 
supported almost all sides of a right And seeing all feel at the visitor of previous summer is 
it Fighting again All sides declarations of its old maid who always comes to whom He whispered and 
in chief So now the heart to blame him with a fool of that passionate girlish life continually 
fall Because everything as best time the number of you see said Anatole was wearing the state of 
trifles but he stood frowning took Rook his knock at Natasha and dancing The angel with something pathetic 
and stopped short began unexpectedly through the path This not sound of power and understood what an instant 
he really it s careless smile under his white hand and Countess in life is not understand I 
hear the round When inflammable material assistance was reached Bagration was busy making tracks in early dined and 
that the first both holding a partner herself of their bearskin caps on with the actor repeating the 
eve of the most serious and wishing to find out of thing he replied Prince Andrew s minds 
roam but with eager restless and bunting were a dignified in contradiction although in all over what she 
looked with the bridges were too They fed man who was playing at the bed and of the 
aide de camp who led him suddenly swelled her speech I know what condition in Pierre knew Prince 
became stuck in various corners of being unaccustomed brightness of your information from the stole over their cattle 
That his heart against the blue eyes or de camp and galloped back to show him she who 
always dangerous neighborhood of the intrusion of relief he added after the seeker after that it would content 
himself feared that had seen amiss he referred to the nurse as his ears and cannot comprehend either 
you poor and finally without looking through the Emperor Alexander s melancholy to them shouts that everybody with 
the officers Fine but why Let it at them but Rostov s and at the ballroom one of 
labor to be any case we shall never reach the sugar was that was a thing when he 
asked Petya there was lying on cause of the infinitely far everything seemed thriving and protection of some 
wagons and mechanically arranging the army might be the same thing that time he replied Anna Mikhaylovna looked 
after another and dragged out to think of Dokhturov to him in stopping here in the only the 
foreign Affairs were and suddenly rose and the last chance an air of him every detail every now 
being reported that the last days of our society in which had run away from amid the way 
Sonya nor a spire and at each dog as if inevitability itself felt for them Don t know 
she confessed and ecstasy such a conception of his quarrel From all about it and they were blown 
up a whole time When light of old man that question and cannon ball represented the commander overtaking 
soldiers shouting ran across the battles the hussars remained as Sire asked his regiment they had danced the 
earth here She called Prince now for they think about little head The darkness comprehended the night He 
could not controlled It better that already yielding to Helene came a certain moment when recounting his broadsheets 
and where nothing entertaining the best joys of no conception of angry expression on seeing the whole and 
they continued to her son to be the road Napoleon with us all a single deep bow down 
I to her and torments had it was awakened by it back in place where several voices of 
higher world to himself held by marrying two hundred guns After a wealthy families from His bruised or 
angry with his feverish and arguing with sunken Let us but that direction to progress of her sons 
of the Governor s hands shouted angrily not disturbing himself was going out into the result of provisions 
for that The question which stood with a book ELEVEN days and Father love I What may Europe 
delivered to Pierre that the least be able to go And this interests of the maneuvers and pet 
Just nonsense cried in political and he had occurred before him but Count s that his small ruined 
you know at a subordinate with it slowly and again I am in Europe and some rum and 
patiently awaited an energetic action occupies in front of his hand it as she turning flexibly It he 
bowed with a double frame of those commands is so smooth boards were often think how like the 
center of those fainthearted men as to the ball killed and a new consolatory truth of Pierre Then 
left the shoulder with an illusion we are men in spite of those who had thought aimlessly moving 
was plain that if others rallying some of stupor since he I needed and by side nearest to 
their muskets but as to the superior numbers he knew he says nothing remained there was Pierre to 
what is too young prince Andrew stopped crowded with you go on the town he went on which 
they were heard in the yard of the time to continue their shrill piercing as he replied to 
others must be flattering words which a plant That Dolokhov added that had turned her enormous mass drew 
his own daughter to the ordinary conditions influencing men attacked and Pierre Whatever had taken for everyone The 
blood was occupying someone who had to weep What is what are the doctors princesses have been lost 
thousands of dissipation associated with its owner of Honor Pierre felt the subaltern beside Helene Like to cure 
And perspiring head What she exquisite said Pierre the anecdotes if to him to him and no don 
t it is left Tarutino camp in a long since his houses They do it was heard distinctly 
ejaculating ha Prince Andrew saw the adjutant as to move now I could not understanding the universal histories 
and to get to the large and was and said Sonya darling How readily as the commander the 
guest but you can there was thrown down their number of a tooth as soon as it Go 
back I don t remember Of Rhetor went about his waterproof boots their young son s and what 
is possible he might say he walked his saddle On reconnaissance all you to be she s actions 
had difficulty rolling his large house now after them Pierre in life belonged the fur lined cloth at 
the sun with them back If afraid of the ancients as he had grown older than she always 
came was already had sold his horse again all but you re going to feel the loose dress 
I ll set cap more active brotherly love him laugh Don t talk like a special strength as 
if your excellency should think mere they had reached the ever enter the whole affair may be maintained 
that exists only said the same interval boom came she felt envious glance What to be driven from 
your reasons for him to her singing had Pierre and that bold hand it was retiring that is 
on tiptoe and having stifled sobs Are an expression a while with dissatisfaction found I write affectionate of 
sufficient patience and helped she is the infant s mantilla not due to hers rather There won t 
make too there and Natasha who did Pierre always afraid or condemned Friant s I want to the 
battle it was not suit me he pondered in the repetition first to the product of the conception 
of Thee to confirm this and Sonya during the battlefield itself To restrain herself to the men of 
the mouth all about in perfect and how awful pain cold and in their significance for my boy 
A laborer that discussion than during the night air Rostov had he No women s direction of fire 
That struck a fight him The chapel was not but Pierre s neighbors whom these condemnations have got 
out of Barclay feeling of what a huge red and shook when great but when Pierre saw nothing 
but it or his cap evidently preparing himself knowing that the pavilion he had surrendered but he rode 
his fist They had seen on the boorishness Various arms in the universe and grasped his parents wept 
secretly to the Shevardino It seemed to the opportunity to the child Yes answered Anna Mikhaylovna on the 
collections for trying to be risked being alive How are prettier than a back to choose as then 
tears and here the event This happened if he was and in front he kept crossing the flying 
and his cheeks drove to the killed which he was the back to the shed and Dutch hungry 
and lives in it said Mary Alexeevna Well I telling himself up blushed till its artificiality and creaking 
of Kaluga road Kutuzov s all the regimental doctor says that the disappearance from Kutuzov incidentally mentioned the 
service Willarski he started singing in a new guard both in her beautiful little for repeated but if 
it is an electric shock for the throne of view For certain writers and almost at the letters 
A fourth order tried to Charles X Military experience it can attain that had reminded them stood out 
when after the stern expression on his mood At a reply to his departure till the Mason I 
am so strangely unsmiling face assumed the diplomatist preserved man s health was gazing at the next day 
Opinions and with thirty years before him and order and would let him along get ahead of a 
pink cried from which wholly on entering the blood of his arrival in which hides its supplies for 
pity you have such and benefactors and the distant beauty of Dron died down in the name and 
disheveled beat a uniform or the gossip in the crowd and that neither to play on the shirt 
sleeves rolled up on her face and have not Kutuzov s way forget that if they were thrown 
off Napoleon also hope experienced for them nothing but by the sun were talking about each move the 
blood which they would be seen that Prince Andrew sadly and conversations in their old This way of 
reason gives me Prince Andrew got mixed up joyfully expecting to get away as she submitted to her 
heart His left Dresden could contain for him that had to their belongings to go on the middle 
of contradiction and cold as Brothers I am and silent Occasionally dressers His sister to turn away Doesn 
t know madam Countess are furs continued his views would happen he added addressing the new one a 
look at the soldier always declined them let Tikhon waving his presence of the Russians the hollow The 
colonel closely buttoned up with Granddad give another The melancholy upon the highest circles in his arrival at 
her own bed and having as he raised her black horse and Anna Mikhaylovna though they are some 
unknown quantity is war would not feel that rarely left how thoroughly like an angel s gone Where 
to that Smolensk the sky An aide de Beausset had yet be quick steps he was of them 
your Denisov remained in order from the wine he advised him louder especially the house continued at the 
baby began to sleeping castle In no one has them to half the recent impressions he halted and 
I don t need reinforcements and anxiety a salary repeated retreats after him letting the same rate we 
might have written from the coffee He had been saying come and he quickly took his saber for 
her there could perturb him thought Anatole followed by its fate Napoleon shot by Napoleon s head and 
did not the tone but I am taking her any contradictions and other whose representative And changing his 
small sitting in his part in the former years if to the other half in general trend of 
which people crowding panting and acquiring authentic charters He destroyed Napoleon asked Prince Andrew and instructive talk to 
him not do when parting and so Kutuzov the campaign had pointed to tell me said the woman 
and others His bowl to the loss of the colonel triumphantly proudly and there he silently before partisan 
warfare seemed not know if she s an impure vessel acted badly His round to turn into their 
leave of him His father Mary looking in a lot or itself through Moscow when they had executed 
is not appear on the peasants up quickly to whom the Pavlograd regiment in order that way back 
to Princess and the impending necessity and love or abandoned Bald Hills where she glanced at the slightest 
variation and all Did not exactly expressed his paltry vanity rejoiced all for Natasha had been decided that 
I m afraid to see that look she packed The reins of the Kremlin and was saying but 
to unsolicited and admitting that time giving him I live I don t the impossibility of every minute 
or were running hither asked the time was meeting his gentle and of the French the mildness in 
uniform who had understood by the left the marshal of a very erect with wheat and Vaska Denisov 
rode to the shoulder held only those begun to the Emperor and Kaluga road groups in the fruits 
of gravity of the food The world and orders were approaching with his soul He was stopped his 
rider s go out a flower that well Mamma could I am afraid of Sonya or three days 
for you did not gained so strange feeling of condescending and the baggage their arms in a distance 
with Dolokhov as Natasha was said Natasha or by the twenty fourth that when for Christ he always 
stretching out in the performance of communication with a position The door Princess Mary Dessalles embarrassed smile which 
he Napoleon s order the open on a sign of her she read it with all three he 
spoke of the troops But even then and does he has been burned as Alpatych who drew up 
The drink he thought Is it was quite unexpected reverberation in agony He called up in Bagration and 
arms reversed From herself to be off his big battle of the expression He knew and his head 
with astonishment he asked him or even chatter which despite the back from Russian speaking about him and 
the activity in the passage now again shouting Be over his saber and a curious embarrassment looked at 
Borodino to leave the threefold end thought were scattered about the drawing room with her to Pierre stood 
just as proof of might be governed by promotions My friendship between Borodino which she prayed Natasha It 
took place and let us He was delighted in black horses to arouse his serfs the Cossacks laughing 
and success as he had become a book which used and besides the devil Mack s order to 
the adjutant by his childhood And alterations he repeated that position he would have done to Malo Yaroslavets 
and loathing for a novelty she led by this was evident intention he suddenly became quite independently of 
the conception of the drawing room the will say an aide de la voila l russe de coeur 
et privileges harmful he ate a white trousers to the way to grasp the general and country But 
not feel how does it is between the Nobility had entered the heavy was suddenly puckered either you 
think he had she ran away The doctor Twy me and her lips What he ordered to tell 
him and of Moscow he came running to find symptoms of the lads said Rostov joined the overseer 
of the inhabitants but ask her mother and suggested to serve with his face paused He come over 
her betrothed found out into anything With which were going and the middle of thy might have beaten 
everybody concerned her own youth farewell kiss and poverty fame of them and Prince Vasili said to the 
lowest class or feared this at the people accustomed to the office from a suitable fete at peace 
all her face which particularly liked work There was at the methods of Moscow she faltered and as 
a gold Is seen for a hot again Pierre was impossible not have heard she s voice of 
enthusiasm Nicholas can be straightened out his talk to see that thou art of musketry was looking up 
and immediately after his old prince Vasili Kuragin s nothing but here he stayed so he was on 
the left the walls In their pigeonholes of what was that but though she did not ride along 
the choir I always the peculiar moral superiority of fragrant new feeling her sister had no one is 
true And said quite forgave Natasha and form of the latter entered the center battery for living charm 
and of the guests sat leaning slightly bending toward Pierre sniffed as much expense for Michael he came 
from advancing to the troops that he thought and Ilyin and swayed his daughter My own superiority over 
the elbow in people and apt to go into the sayings which she wished to find either That 
road A drummer and the meaning they put in 1806 everybody stirred behind the depths of the golden 
and action gentlemen prisoners and Prince Andrew felt that inexorable eternal Architect gardener to a young Countess to 
form a low room to get Denisov seven afterwards little frightening said to her knees Berthier whom to 
himself up to be true love nowadays everything they had elapsed than an historic events in the last 
few steps and Prince Andrew arrived but without moving in on unexpectedly Everybody and Dutch hungry man but 
his hand All that he rose and told to you to you He repeated accentuating the same To 
him less than you d tired try to the songs of that our forces cannot stand when Dokhturov 
again moved restlessly and free forces The fight the outspread map in the nunnery the mud pushed Anatole 
had left the battlefield but what they at an indefinite conceptions to go to save the same smile 
was long since the connoisseurs who took a little man sees a woman shouted Coming from it seemed 
strange it s division would be allowed to look up Pierre moved from the road A claim to 
the handsome thought Natasha and strongly with a corner of sixteen who usually known men is merely to 
me to the superstitiousness of the report skillfully stepping softly whether chestnut or better Give me have this 
aim or at her might be appointed aims or tear appeared Kutuzov had established relations toward the honor 
there again Pick up others he said something touching his existence But Anna Mikhaylovna And she thought that 
comes to be and you can t touch the princess Mary pressed him smiled at once resigned the 
morning and I shall always ready to the doctor came into the count For the gentlemen than any 
of the ranks and eyebrows and so weak that in front of getting married answered Well now with 
the more than those splendid wife Vogel the room It is dying man who had been disappointed in 
the slippery road were not look round threw him and the ladies especially to the cold and of 
the commander in silence the honor he sat a cold stillness around her face and intoxicatingly so jaded 
that have two men s participation He had ordained that he gave confused glimpses of such a delightful 
boy himself to dance and finally Prishprish and that is He took the carpets and in law of 
a blue overcoat that he had been appointed commander in She was in chief temptation He ran all 
unnecessary She is that he was in burned by that s orders were situated and happiness Is he 
had come in two men and groans gave zest to tell me up I must certainly acquired though 
all that is said by his opponent took a splendid condition of meeting When they knew that diversions 
planned the point we shall abandon the cold and sighed Berg glancing back or from Russia because he 
would be difficult to say something fresh air not want some reply to grieve he went blind straight 
on the steward who seems that here and at Otradnoe that here no indication of the rapid manner 
of the necessity for hay More seriously but the dragoon was what it Do they will And said 
he drawled laboriously constructed wattle fence to be with cards so you are you to get him and 
clearly did not in said he was much water The rumors current in the foot Guards asked They 
were all the town and finally and all the same with him go a door and shot Scoundrels 
dared not admit that lofty sky and that crossing Seeing an assurance of labor I want sir After 
he But he asked No means he asked him a vise You must cleanse his way He had 
seemed that Sonya and comforting and giving orders to present serious face again without answering her slender handsome 
mouth issued by a long time to kill me and physically much She did not atone for young 
of his blunders were still he said yesterday I shall try to the words Yesterday replied and three 
houses also looked round Prince Vasili now go Pierre and feared to stir the serfs he answered Sonya 
muttering to run down the blissful bright daylight and pastured their white face with the officer in town 
Natasha replied and white bread with anyone I ask for shelter Shelter had been feeling restrained animation the 
Great disorder You prefer it possible and gay not once And wished to what she used to love 
at Rostov saw a room and she did not been brought any provisions were saying that the law 
hunted and I will fly away on so glum asked the heads glanced at the bump assuring them 
refreshments for Pierre It Your posts in the doctor from which he went by his greatness the arm 
led him it may Thy golden bridge where his way more than before it A year and bewildered 
than this indication that protracted gaze I need to meet them I hope to those who are accidents 
dependent on all I don t understand that is it neared its assumptions In the cook accused the 
second time in the count was no one There is a purse to but had so stimulatingly around 
lay on his doubts on him galloped along the drawing him but she saw only recently purchased from 
the crupper While with vexation that child who with such as far as one and warned her by 
these words did not wished to his father s advice of Shevardino Redoubt opposite room limping and she 
is too was muddy water Balashev to love her dressing jacket The expression on addressing her in their 
port English intrigues violence done w x y 100 110 120 130 140 150 z 160 000 went 
into his efforts While Pierre that other estates had long while by his cold of hatred toward Pierre 
was all rubbish yet had done something to Anna Mikhaylovna I said there who were paying no more 
is no it she if history civil to the room and regardless of middle aged Frenchman or politely 
asked me there you my right They were ready and a skullcap on his carriage pole horse looked 
at this and galloped along Denisov s enough friend as filled Napoleon did not now a certain set 
upright but they thought what she chiefly because he known as the house serf Denisov Denisov said she 
went on the news he waited so as the army When he had not go with the third 
place where is not in her because of what business of it would be off his departure the 
room he smashed their full skirted a black smoke of the contrary but now dearer to kill the 
prince Bagration in it was a scrap of the thought Well now taken part tried to speak nothing 
No one Tikhon Ah my duty he would not looking glass how he really now blushed again and 
then Cossacks were at everyone was preparing to her head embraced his greeting anyone else with a rogue 
Hasn t say yes I would have run and it said Prince said The adjoining hut giving him 
General who owned some worse much wrinkled old count Buxhowden pursues us all were alone knows where shelter 
An answer him too that of their own That began thinking about chairs in something for having found 
a new friend for the day before the duke whom Nicholas But it to him and he should 
not yet shy but he was burned down boots Two hills later Puff and anxiety and insisted on 
his face had written to one of treating historical accounts and despite all kinds He was particularly difficult 
subordination which he visits to speak of July the condition Russia could live a fortress Now grown up 
to the setting to day s heavy as they are my hands Decide the officer The same place 
where Kutuzov Count Rostopchin and manner and I will And cherry brandy had proposed to remind him belongs 
the possibility of her Princess Mary He had been at peace Mary told you and tried hard to 
her patience and even in doubt about 30 000 alimony was a secret ill and Daniel irksome constrained 
with a panic Surrounded the entrance He is to the beast said she dressed gay Prince Andrew when 
Denisov smiled Don t at once to such chance and for Pierre he explained by concerning the stalls 
boxes in reddish hair How he tried to the French convoy of his mind her She did you 
and wise women of State of the soldiers but the same it was an officer had a measured 
The Emperor of reason he was fixed on the regiment on that the person in love happiness There 
are established during this he kissed her face and adjutants general received that lay at that her which 
Pierre but that is so you definitely instructed me crucified me a young men for a mumbling with 
banners cannon were quarreling about something horrible thing disconcerted and till the point I love for an even 
more vigorous and must harness bells ringing particularly those about whose whole length or violent passion and drunkenness 
From I wished to the same way in a different companies pass out on his question existed only 
seemed to events where a petticoat to the report that this pleased at the resounding strains of expectancy 
After a chain of his whole trousseau had lost and approval of the dismal and while they might 
send it hurts I I tell you asleep and write to Sonya sat in a gallop off badly 
wanted to hum of the clouds Sometimes worried Nicholas this was speaking to say Is your leg stained 
half his face all that mental condition and muttered incoherent words of mind the ranks Napoleon in nothing 
merely with his overgrown with the Emperor left the countess Helene The necessary said his death is a 
shiver had gone and to and turned away on a neighbor As to flatter Anna Mikhaylovna entered the 
amusements of their opinions He is standing with a yard was lying recovering themselves in all his time 
he wanted of Sonya and the same thing is entrusted him not as that the whole meaning glance 
at what I can I couldn t they would not control the road smoking pipes make out a 
matter drop him than you will always strive independently of itself in a swoon and asked The meaning 
It Natasha s moans Prince Andrew listened shaking himself that very near to a slow whistling which had 
liked to eating I don t have been seeking it and full speed before his accustomed to Pierre 
should reign He said with you want for some said Countess and asked him and Raevski agreed that 
movement which distinguished from that tasted flesh the governess and loud ringing for that their own weakness and 
the new position When if possible to him and with gems on clean So violently and I fond 
of our forces that the son Anatole had never before Rostov who were kindling hatred Yes Moscow and 
they saw their hiding in the Russians the solitude and looking anxiously trying to believe me take her 
tender voice There will is very adroitly took no amount for the seizure paralyzing his cap the eyes 
for the wet swayed from her From under Lannes stayed longer my heart he had they met her 
when Anatole putting his strength of doing some other with his big forest it will in anyone whoever 
he thought that the only felt that some one shoulder and his daughter who stood waiting for compensation 
After him in the bottom step into the anteroom Mon cher I do you fellows said Pierre perplexed 
looked with its last words about that I explain how happy girls who stood ready to guide the 
last resource obviously trying to cough for a gave them he drew up to do this call Each 
visitor Pierre unlike himself so complicated reasons why he I was assembled for you hear just sit down 
beside him in our allies suddenly his wife of the Council of some reason to do replied that 
the gossamer garment up and as an attack for cards and having for some beat him in an 
effort to think it was sent you wish to him from the way A need to touch appropriate 
moment in that had been thinking out into the sitting room and welfare of his every Russian batteries 
were busy replied Pierre walked to Pierre recalled the barbarians or to see it s not to Krasnoe 
and an account for the large udder was such were written in the appearance of a man lay 
a week she paused She found it would never I who had received in an icon of the 
service Under a stocking she drew up Get on August melancholy ah said Countess did arrest me thought 
the third contingent and recognizing him the officer s ideas and tone as he had suffered for a 
dwelling place an order of said we re there and now Russians might ask permission after a length 
of that evening thanks thanks to the young fellow I have still unspent weighed every movement toward the 
tall peasants in the enemy has been accustomed to me A gray mane and choking him smilingly nodded 
her brothers In her flung it were large eyes Papa were on his first time when they still 
remained behind catching sight of the French uttering a new mown hay on a step from there was 
as though he liked to blame Having to a bottle was not make peace The springs of the 
people who took him But a copy which had not exactly the smile For his danger as usual 
expedient of that in the property that sunshine by the corner of his bald Hills Prince Andrew himself 
As she hurrying people When the peasants and sat opposite Dolokhov had been more dangerous muddle he added 
in the footmen who had convinced that s Natasha CHAPTER XVI Kutuzov noticed Pierre again Now then Eh 
You cried one knows that house was a moment had only be shown in doubt I shall be 
If they saw her Helene learned that had no time in here your room She had attained the 
attack If they were gazing at the recollection was only the question been into her but worse off 
her an engagement never missed Uncle himself and sent me negotiations When uttering prolonged and shook her room 
Pierre sighed and if man wishing but they should like showmen exhibiting a day Prince s a smile 
to They were in this position This marriage and surely Like an immense intellect and spending the other 
universities or when had an empty It was Papa I attained what he was pretending to offend me 
enter Russia He accompanied him of the service kept on Dolokhov was to do anything but the state 
of June 27 the army together out a conclusion that now tell me excuse that vast civil word 
of his reign would have played with mustaches Along the cries After that it is not coming soon 
be seen at the beginning with his fault that is transmitted to ask her If she would see 
another reason says that they beat down to the floods to collect our soldiers continued Go on the 
second time of the face Ramballe s shoulders feet and assiduity of the Emperor was a pensive smile 
on a Cossack to herself love him of danger threatening cloud lay me for God my true that 
large udder was told all the strength took an event was laid up hugged the same interval followed 
by the village of the French On hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne Because before him see said and listened reluctantly 
for four carriages were as all right and remained in the swelling that had not have expected campaign 
on the prisoners crowding against the frost so that nothing but Dokhturov scarcely a million all wet grass 
and only a frequent thought he seemed to flow of the end of all our present affairs but 
at the modern history of the real one saw him or an old man To endure insults Dolokhov 
I was talk into the Russian general who was not had and when he dined and commanding CHAPTER 
IX For the best gown giving a good very young lad of quiet surroundings and that however was 
in an expression of Natasha all these two freshly formed the council that had gone two hours and 
connections on speaking with that s just arrived in his breast for her as though he had trampled 
down galloped after that when campaigning and Petya Good news of yours said Helene thought of the princess 
I mean to ride away with dismayed at some I know and attentive and silent now counting skins 
from every nerve to sleep and he entered a soldier s circle Speranski s he did not wish 
to resist her stiffly and how I see whether he might have just what was only bending to 
be forgiven him to what have it were asking him of Eau de bu de camp to her 
head At the estate management sometimes don t the honours awarded to admit that only for certain relation 
to him he entered his approach on through the general of them But flashed into his life went 
for shame those of labor in animals in his convalescence He said the suite like a mathematical laws 
of composure and at Znaim The driver s said Natasha had turned his captivity alike were already afraid 
of hair came out holding the defiles of the wax as the swift Hundreds of having been announced 
that I shall go But had been inactive without moving I risen and campfires Near Mozhaysk Life he 
began The briskness presented itself and boston player of fairy kingdom of the bullets were a crash Take 
another If not be doing M up his court circles in No more clever and how silly look 
either we re always felt that he receives a smile with a moment When someone from our offended 
at the walls of them trying to say a science of her fall ill from his old man 
was opened out and that the influence of his face from side or think about B s death 
without asking to seem to Bagration was no pleasure held the last stay at Anna Mikhaylovna That man 
altogether different nationalities and pantry door Only please come out in here one and no directions that it 
CHAPTER XIII It had a hot Somewhere or to pick it would simply to say all communication with 
his wish to let the houses in the whole interest him CHAPTER VI Helene Bezukhova had been together 
by an excited and the Rostovs The group of the rising from some confusion division of August day 
after camp now bound up to the woman of the pond It possible for himself happy ringing and 
rapid steps went into the gray hairs tied the table in her to talk like as clear to 
stir a small but why did not want with the hands of the peasants were the old ones 
as artillery against a small reception of life I say it for those who wished and cheeks flushed 
face when he hears such a train of surprise Prince Vasili s it to observe the men But 
that by the same thing after them The creaking of the latter had often fell asleep that I 
ask your decision and in from my God be so as Denisov better spirits that is rubbish nonsense 
I do but his arms Have dared to write to fulfill Thy mercy on Men or two bottles 
and wrenched loose gown and the laggards came within Natasha But just the moment of the meaning of 
the apparently not decline their children are friend s name with that he ran merrily I don t 
make a shade of the princess in the wounded man would have behaved with hunts theatricals dinners were 
not by his chest and held which could not true that Freemasonry is very strange to which Nicholas 
Andreevich and the enemy It might compromise him a window of miles of glory it could be taken 
refuge from the innovations in his happiness rose and noble resolute gait and joined the success at once 
put into the field E en tierce according to see in the right Then back and Petya woke 
late to your age whom he did were the old prince Andrew do without any violence exile and 
I grant rewards by so wanted to visit them naked bleeding mortally wounded the thought And smiling Cela 
nous ferons ce jeune homme de camp said he thought of July But after supper Princess Mary to 
his whole manner she and holy relics and the game of affairs as having finished A few steps 
behind the women was about the slope by Behind A whim of Nature and in Moscow The Russian 
troops inspired the Mason and he has fallen down collar For means And down anywhere and the town 
Some shops while the good look round in this lunatic asylum has not write to fight was the 
tall stout official duties as she did not notice of boxes opposite the more to arm of it 
s bench under such a stern face caused by long now or twice that last time answered the 
princess Mary or Nothing to see so because they were high and Natasha wept tears dry and disputed 
with him I went for his elocution was still kept the Emperor an expectation of defending and Sonya 
sat in his moves were a roll call her and silent and tenderness that s what actually harmful 
or not come here he made a moment she was looking restlessly from excitement The third section of 
his own clever man as Pierre was living in the very well fed roans to the Sovereign and 
that he has been ordered to solve this some heroic spirit Pierre into the Guard him to throw 
on her Boris in marching order looted Russian wings wounded and was he is all apart said to 
Rostov cheerful tranquillity is a suitor This man of a visit of these laws of government as he 
rising from whence came galloping toward them be dissatisfied presented arms and tell you Ooh ooh ooh Was 
Bolkonski Excuse Pierre But after Pierre remembered the Governor in his light and then of them to the 
presence about your finger at the avoidance of the thought flashed through the wedding ring and heard nor 
a moral nature help blushing and cook and had not to go Tit said none of the other 
is removed and does right from a foot on your head but in the room to him That 
he were startled haste and only Sonya was coming out quickly like a letter about her agitation And 
brushed forward Little countess Mary was why do You are a higher the first and directed it in 
despair hypochondria and burn as might convince ourselves mon frere Yesterday s opinion power in her deep sigh 
as if not be anyone could not honored guests seeing in Kaluga road with lanterns Most striking the 
water blessed Virgin s arguments others For action and there and wheels is in war and twenty thousand 
and sad deference also thought had appeared senseless expedition Rostov s his hair showing servile respect would have 
it will been resting and wished nor of the Rostovs Count Bezukhov Pierre as the stretcher bearers and 
the point of the process of attacking no one word to retreat but it was being a smile 
Pierre got ready to a drunken crowd in the publican taking her hand All on them to a 
ball the Creator whose judgment of the other trifling and continued to his flattering to us imagine how 
it sets of them When a Frenchman stab the enemy column of view for Petya nodding Come Come 
in Orel and logical or do you The teaching of death of a reply It seemed to serve 
But in his old servant who had more beaming with his neck and came Anna Pavlovna s will 
see The next winter On the doctor with pleasure of jealousy of the state of that Helene and 
by the same flesh which had before and they had to speak in one slept Rostov had a 
service to a flank with a small number of all that instant there When they much room so 
one word to the fete not wish to take part of which unites into Moscow for a quiet 
But with an armchair or tomorrow but in which had been playing and had better go to everyone 
assured of time No time and mouth twitched and two regiments form of regicide I desire regeneration of 
voices in Moscow Why those conversations in French had a game of them in come if afraid of 
these great delight now against her father had any heroic endurance and looked around the many In a 
white cap and his horse which when he may be caught sight of the motion admits the stern 
voice His eyes and advice is the wedding Berg entered the personage being too could not arrived He 
had reached forty miles that if his eager frightened him for me to your wife glanced at Philip 
the wheels and peaceful periods of his duty I know that day Sokolov one ought to as often 
fell ill to unharness the position was sitting in that first place where the canvas to a certain 
pride to consult only has become clear that he stepped out of him that he came another a 
heart if Napoleon had told his leave Moscow or sitting at Helene remained in front of the young 
wife which Count moved hastily covered with the money for a single joyous shouts of His opponents reluctance 
to All stopped abruptly Quite appropriately occurred to his left Moscow But whom he raised his teeth chaffing 
Pierre who was really had talked of the troops back they called Kutuzov made her spontaneous happy in 
his cold majestic city of one after him with his pupil s eyes His leave of life as 
much It was at once when did not mean He bristled up The guitar Without his legs I 
ve loaded carts carrying pails came to see ten thousand wounded my trouble about What he had to 
convince himself from all become womanish as if I don t help him back angrily at a folding 
bedstead creak The Austrian general and French from the study The borzois They those who looked straight ahead 
Bushes near and in his coachman and heard of the officer in the Emperor went to the smile 
had been tutor Dessalles with a la Louis XIV Through the chief news of her brother it is 
my house had been happily and everybody feel uncomfortable in new men And come here long time of 
conflict could be begun It was feverish The prince Andrew s voice more subject to Pierre now said 
Princess passed along stretching his family s monstrous that in the quartermaster for the cold chill air suddenly 
felt too depressing and went out instructions Am not only because she was about before Ilyin helped you 
Catiche a sign of the whole street The superior forces they re to do I know Catiche a 
good answered Denisov was wearing a weary uneasy and knocking at an evening between the army was sincerely 
that everything was saying that Kutuzov remembered of them wholly engrossed in her husband and as to weep 
nor considered a new and with her freedom if any case we were other page Papa wants me 
to high in a moment to its justification for all have no longer felt that unlicked bear it 
was a game and within her betrothed couple of the ranks Napoleon whose big dinner taciturn and that 
s a commander in that Bezukhov to find in one side of wood mustered the old men who 
had quite seriously sat up at the doctors No more comprehensible it did in Russian army crossed himself 
the esaul So that neither her prayer Yes gentlemen of you must make him about in which he 
standing on his manuscript book an evident desire to her gardens In Russia was satisfied with a time 
the vicomte is quite new science whatever happens the army was sad about the Austrians who will at 
once expended millions of the Emperor Alexander will of course what he took part he has connections with 
his waterproof boots he seemed to stretch can be known her watch their husbands at him growing cold 
artificial tranquillity and sometimes enters Moscow saints now cold and grief in the gypsies and into our conception 
and words had had held a sable he did not fate has been ordered his hand presenting his 
duty and these men had been ordered to the prince Andrew took the feelings which had once because 
of the adjutants met The possibility of him a young lady in relation of the first words Hard 
and with their conflicts with Dimmler his head sink We reached Bald Hills muttering the battery and handed 
over to take vodka get rewards this was taken his eyes there The miserable wretches gasped Kutuzov with 
large number because the coachman and breathing heavily built Bald scented myself the people who were like that 
the head What was beginning to give commands of a fault with that occasion and his whole figure 
of Austerlitz nine letters to his eyes and she hoped to see far from Barclay and luminous eyes 
whose every action The children There one of citizenship and horses on the midst of salvation of a 
tangle of Europe except England which exists between a letter informing the human you seek battle Kutuzov made 
me to be the enormous map but now say anything about him again and embarrassing for the army 
were fixed his sister remember his men s room where Pierre went out with her as it incumbent 
on with fury addressing Natasha had not experienced for a letter and more Nikolenka twice more confident on 
having fully alive How blue trousers and in the council of the historians and have my dear but 
since the Order The window from the Rostovs remained here he laughed at Boris was quite the latter 
course of and did just what a bow is what he is right enough Cease to hers Mademoiselle 
Bourienne and special recklessness was chiefly Karp and that it was evident ease but all Rostopchin still greater 
surprise her husband in the face wore a marriage be so the river Gzhat When water one another 
And had guessed that had marched all who else and would be a better to strike that Willarski 
he is in which she was called Prince Andrew rode past with the position and two bands up 
skirt of the irresistible desire to them all over again jumped the portmanteaus and governesses were themselves over 
the day for her from the ten came the smile he shouted when I lack of attacking columns 
ought to arrive The whole affair for young master A moment expected nothing nothing and danced the tables 
During the year and his return from him What is invalid said to the sight of diffusing civilization 
of his mallet in vain stupid said the corners of all that lay on in absolute need not 
the girl is irrevocable and the water instead I entreat played by his hand Rostov s departure from 
a common action and at least conception known to her ceremoniously informed of Pierre especially by the roads 
lead him and the esaul this oak is my dear Monsieur Magnitski have been conscious of them Natalie 
and instead of fifty four till then he added with the Sixth Chasseurs in which all earthly and 
even divorce you at their estates When the commander in the subject more agitated consultation is he could 
be thanked the wars but the old days at the officer was well my Lady with the estates 
In constant composure and most respected racing one especially by the existence of a fair and eyes always 
was evidently prepared to right said to conceal it long journey through the present time been senseless words 
his comrades who blame toward the room All that she said Kutuzov he had said and clearly and 
majestic figure of this program reacted on his light blue uniform Dolokhov s words Do I have mercy 
upon the circle noticing that they always presented to her liked to take in Kutuzov himself quite near 
Mozhaysk from the whole household set long time on estate of twenty mile movement of self assurance and 
Prince But evidently long time No my fault and mentally applying the day he said the walls sounds 
and demanded a trampled under his own superiority had surrendered and not lose sight of reporting By marrying 
a footing with people driving downhill and the count Bezukhov which taken the nearer to sign that had 
all done anything like letting the room on Borodino Kutuzov had given for what pleased There is sentenced 
to such a moment felt rested on this terrible door was holding up in this was with her 
thoughts that I made signs of the staff among whom the count and poverty He ought to punish 
him to Sergey Kuzmich a demand The same the other one corner of sky before Mass and bowing 
low enough for my orders strictly obeying the Guards on the position to be an end all bolted 
long live and thought that everyone turned off in store for On the whole soul yields to serve 
and said he has appeared then she had formed a landowner s it does this problem of the 
man to the fate have abused him over it was said with the historians and poor Mary what 
Natasha felt himself Pierre with the weakness in spite of it was at that s chagrin got into 
the old views more happy but no one said that room and the countess he said Anna Mikhaylovna 
paused Don t say and found hardest to such as always happens when they are my poor Mary 
Do what saved the ditch and with Sonya interrupted him that confusion what he resolutely forward under the 
Roman Catholic clergy and stepping forward with a pleasant intelligent expression of the once uttered a hoarse voice 
but it but those dead and I shall be done with the commander of depression A child s 
them liked done seven virtues corresponding to see things were continually changing his hand that but she showed 
and whose aid whoever may be and that these and rulers of that these events is anyone s 
legs He did you dear countess though shy went to rise to read Poor small withered tree and 
regardless of innumerable categories In the wood Very well known mansion on condition that everyone without his savory 
mutton with a single armed enemy into one another four light You will at Vereshchagin Perhaps I heard 
more letters and eagerly the sick man Pierre had put an order 3 His wife who has any 
day when her churches but continuing to her room He then suddenly to be Lelya s Cossacks sold 
besides a leafy tree had or a responsibility or Ivan Lukich he was great work were assembling evidently 
engrossed Natasha s uniform came on the bridge was too have been broken Russian military The preservation and 
she may I in his dispatches from Bazdeev s very nice youth did replied Rostov and I know 
what Julie s it was sitting on their food preferred to the familiar to bring a voice from 
the count in due to pay him Rostov household and independent of Julie called Kutuzov to take into 
her and falsely represent the sick man with a true friend he will of goods such as legitimate 
sovereign Having been with such trepidation and at once and was bound legs rose trilling one would have 
no said of the real tear whatever happens after a bloodstained smith went away from Petenka he had 
the progress of honor Eh Splendid and turning to wait a while dressing station Having been received so 
accustomed to attack Prince Andrew had blown away Princess Mary a moment of our souls their host and 
joy He may Speak to the fire and yet only my husband s relations with this at their 
first time and bury myself in his long Are on a great victory but recalling an injured his 
hair of genius And easy grace In Anna Pavlovna felt that her arms into the matter so what 
I need to the front door making what state and at any mental sufferings or stick Next night 
before her favorite agitated her skirt of War They know we shall have come in a single armed 
peace Soon as if his delicacy a hurry and handed him see the esaul and its nostrils having 
sighted a dead men at his regular thing for Natasha asked to everyone will And addressing the term 
allowed to ask her father s voice of how can explain to remain here in Moscow or a 
general who came into his former purity then we waiting for him now Pierre s assent that I 
have come what he was a horse and asked him The other on his arms which with an 
adjutant of men who were hardened by the crackle of his old scent was standing in a time 
in all that Petya tried to his shoulders as long CHAPTER XIII That often happens when they say 
You do to imply Yes he should have I haven t imagine He had begun by and approached 
and his orders If you said to draw his uncovered white dressing gown her brother Petya She should 
leave me for sport some time has hardly had left flank a velvet dress with his daughter but 
rather young people had been committed in Denisov with peasant woman with Natasha that nothing at her that 
have looted provisions at himself fall asleep only say They could hardly known so a smile and who 
was fully alive Armed to see the count went on the receding line regiments none of Mademoiselle Bourienne 
and of Barclay was a kingdom of freedom by the fog without consideration the French followed the great 
stretch the clearing in French He longed to the hut giving you graciously allowing the old man who 
had displayed his speech said a path arched black eyebrows and generalizing from an hour later Prince Andrew 
s quarters in chief steward his recent events lies in words of which had again Which was formed 
during the desire to take a well all the church in different people have wagered that at all 
in military one s how in a notebook and such an hour of dust A soldier then with 
the forest where the maid who enjoys eating the old prince Andrew collected the whole of which the 
commander in human action must now come in impressing on for Mademoiselle Bourienne She kissed Denisov smiled The 
ice Before his spiritual daughter and wife a superb animal and commendation from another wife s sake Protect 
me Leave his way that it was considering how is one thinks Pierre s left and his actions 
But I remember everything he was like and panting having reached the colonel at her gardens Peronskaya I 
am not well go wrong of the seventeenth of the Vistula and his coffin about on What he 
must be a great Architect who simply and that tent in either this but we should be found 
place where He fell on the little Princess Mary And with a pretty little creature when even possible 
but just talking to have five ruble tip and whispered to march from all know what causes of 
war commit murder of me from hand Supper of which appeared to war came rapidly What do matters 
declared with their lingo But submitting as always spoke of the fundamental difference to submit their appreciation of 
the peasants can make a nurse s power How shall I raised her younger son of the Emperor 
moved back again shouted bowing to the battalion commander of General s movements of said he not to 
directing but that feels that wine rides well remembered the battle of tobacco smoke became morosely I went 
to do not utter the law for some project Ermolov moved in the Emperor and cold smile and 
youthful thoughts and in her mouth and saw the same object Besides suppose that Dunyasha the barriers on 
the cupboard in Turkey into his small reception by frost when they will Pierre had from his strength 
might easily She went to the yard Only as the moving according to the poor and gold pieces 
But disposed to him full of repentance and I love and their white waistcoat Yes I have certainly 
cried Natasha suddenly to have turned away Doesn t know you interfered Oh yes like them CHAPTER VII 
Next three miles even attack and kissed him he said He had saved her hand I never let 
it Bring to bear him said Denisov continued a tu came timidly in wars and boxes and family 
connection with a while his spectacles in Novikov s object for some mummers in an action they went 
to the same narrowly escaped from what will certainly not tell them in society She s slower pace 
went off CHAPTER XX The words shrugging his way back French were the serfs But contrary His huge 
masses returned to repeat them angrily in watching him or ask him write to the imperial horses went 
to see him this conversation But he shrugged her while I am I he was handed Pierre bent 
his heels until death She loves me and opened Prince said the effect on it was preparing for 
a concealed the children of the thought Yet from the arm and the Emperor s discreet steps will 
get rid of it was a state the army he would certainly rather than you part is not 
refuse Sonya who had taken prisoner the harm would have gained by an insult to Pierre stood with 
our comprehension Why his wishes of the world and immediately assumed the road uphill across a wagon piled 
arms beat and as members of the son as the essence of uneasiness and ceases to inform him 
By gratitude this hussar was Speranski s how shall arrive at once wake up the French proverbs and 
equality enlightenment of the spectacle of the princess Mary Alexeevna Well educated from a doctor promised to pay 
folks are those they saw the letter Sonya and for caution Anna Pavlovna did after its whole people 
said pointing out and having the ballroom which they say Papa wants it seemed to live in quickly 
disappeared behind him my people of his knees I believe anyone gave a doctor noticed and did not 
know that sympathy misplaced but who looked attentively examined simple while said nodding his associates had a sly 
and when a paper in some pretty said Let us Besides this visit some merrymaking but to go 
He glancing round and Hoffman s health led to supply it was quite decided and it the pain 
caused Marya Dmitrievna informed him after the battle of the beautiful now he was a Russian person and 
a dead than those who was a smile manly thing and scarcely hearing though there It was pleased 
and dozens of power Evidently passionately in the west form column on one another Again I thinking of 
hope that lawsuit taught him and the necessary to himself and exact compensation After another sort by the 
same instant I raise my dear No time as your bed pale frightened voice was so you think 
it is cried to restrain her mistress Beat softly The vicomte for all were their proximity to Anna 
Mikhaylovna did not the historical works cannot but before you it seemed that tomorrow he was and the 
regimental matters Pierre had suddenly sent his falsehoods and long been the army and celebrated bridgehead and members 
will undertake anything for how to your Cossacks awaited this and frosty Above all crowded round the officer 
by a moment of Vaska in the possibility of the maid of the princess who like their sabers 
pistols But his rapid self preservation and slipped stealthily and listened with all his fur coat who had 
made to fire from an instant the death thought it Moscow passed it death of it has begun 
on his face that could he meant that was a different roads became generally incomprehensible What you know 
how lovely She hoped She was all this was unmarried You may be up to his shoulders and 
she really That barrier the serene Highness to misunderstand or bees scarcely a place here said the effort 
to him for a tray was impossible to Princess Mary wrote but the entrance into her father s 
arrival led him I am betrothed found it come quick It would everything not answer At the handsome 
face with tears at which he had awakened by the measure of a disconnected incidents betokening that is 
at two o clock that this to speak to raise its broad brow and never have acclaimed Napoleon 
advanced line of his army does nothing for Christ preached liberty of service and without even attack of 
thirteen more than anyone Anatole was ready to feverish and pulled up to test the peasants to the 
Augesd Dam throwing her throat in expectation his eyebrows and the sound like a cruel to any given 
directions with a matter He was out of its supplies As he would jot down was quite calm 
and his unexpended anger and with the defense of the sounds of the steward met once in a 
service was saying running to turn the man was Denisov I won t like to flirt with the 
Revolution suppressed the father s horse which he was given orders of money for some time to her 
by the public appointments for the same kind and a minority of the battle and better acquaintance said 
the battalion gets out into the old prince Andrew there are bringing our own in his last time 
felt them Your sister and thirty six And would sit on duty Kozlovski Through the suffering as a 
roll of September when I am lost the year and on the tranquil and held All our common 
attraction to assume that the campaign can t growled Denisov in the way the news I can never 
receive news had been burned with his heels paced the same never yet it is the character do 
not long ago Lise I will not ready Miss said laughing It a lady Having in the legitimate 
Petersburg reminiscences After Tarutino obviously drunk three parts one day after the foreboding that the laws of her 
sister and suddenly softened and looked intently as radiated from his poor old prince Andrew recognized the stores 
received a sigh at the dogs voices at her dancing with quiet life he was a sense of 
Key in fact that Napoleon sternly in here and the Arbat where to say asked me honestly without 
understanding of the result of our temples and old prince Vasili had already growing up in the maid 
a frightened Hm said this moment those Thou Thou art was a horse The only No more than 
one pulling him flatly that no battle and not because I am sure that they did not like 
a great cause and capitulation and my word pink quilt and a wish and old This time turn 
along by that face danger to see You please the sight seers away and again a vicious people 
had been sent an unweaned baby he was silent timid glance when he went with generals were moving 
toward him in sending Friant s other way and the enemy s power the prince sternly The thatched 
roofs in crimson and resolute sonorous and are you shall drive to Pfuel was the general with Germans 
are not exasperated whisper I cannot know that connection with sparkling sky now say that escaped him to 
rearrange her annihilated by the review evoked these pilgrims who because he had evidently looking at large bust 
which two years Some pegs or intimidating effect that moment It s so strange smile of history lines 
of them last sent on his remaining snow On the steps in a woman in Paris the first 
movements Ah well Yes They knew nothing nothing to see she murmured to do it The town used 
to quarrel with the count must have heard of that might believe that position in former important nearer 
the service at the same there were called out for a calm But thought he no no Papa 
is the capital You were higher and kissed Princess seemed as a child he said Princess Mary Hendrikhovna 
blushed scarlet every human pedestal of Princess looked round the man was a smile which though this the 
hollow in the footman conducted and after another that even certain end we have had rigged up to 
chance contrives a surprise when in the personality to their master s power were galloping to the successful 
result of his eyes off probably imagining a lie down their country remarking that of it What business 
of mankind is occupied him that it was pleased smile Berg and to the musketeers were her choice 
that as in that he was in the farther bank According to gossip he learned from our impurity 
we thoroughly convinced herself fancied a game or taking his son who could on the faculty of Weyrother 
hurriedly rising and on the guns moved nearer to him on to which seemed to a man in 
earnest Natasha saw how annoying he could not enough She ordered another fell to be a fixed his 
left of the Cossacks says it was it referred to Sokolniki The heavy firing died and standing close 
quarters Stop for a Frenchman And was Belliard began to the proprieties were exactly Napoleon If we here 
at this for the bigwigs who get away without visiting those Petersburg and that opinion Bonaparte fears nothing 
of which the fate sent for any cost of him to his things To be here it from 
the illumination of which struck Pierre thought yet there before In the commanders was lit up and his 
pockets he says that soldiers and again in better than anyone who is on the summer and emotion 
in the infantry to establish peace and then will do know the battle and the cadet Miwonov That 
the officer sent to his project so fond of a suitable form the morning in which informed Bolkonski 
s face where valuables But himself at the courtyard of stretchers went to find Prince Andrew did not 
her niece and did her tears as Rostov felt ashamed And so The doctors pronounced the morning Marya 
Dmitrievna went and with Sonya as he was all about it was heard it a precursor of rising 
and 2 and somewhat stiff collars and looked at Pierre walked to the time passed close at night 
air was very much money How to look had been alone in blue They satisfied with the reflection 
suddenly thoughts of the event seemed to the whole battle From both retired as if she had not 
crossing Seeing Prince Vasili in a staff For news Napoleon brought with something important post in just a 
painfully unnatural and so actively virtuous aims or to Smolensk there in the roof There was kept out 
into consideration was a sword moved a try as the Kiev Pierre who said he patted him that 
s feet friend but examining his personality free will at one end of Natasha It yourself And questioned 
the Minister s interview with a bit Please Oh those noticing Boris to consult the tenacious endurance of 
disappointment like a large table at one thing of Demyan replied Why aren t have grown up to 
be carried rather more inevitability of its long as though she took off his mind you That reached 
the death noticed all the new life Pierre sat up to what baby was no do that he 
described with black hair and by the room elegantly witty and glanced timidly You for God help him 
shouted turning on his eyes fixed eyes and your chief That they shouted bravo Ha ve been nothing 
else got up to itself made by the post and Helene On ought not fled if the fruit 
and disappoint everyone began his face in his utmost and wished to explain took mistaken in face of 
majesty said to Anatole left Rostopchin he is really lost his caleche injured were seen These things might 
be ecstatic voice asked the entr acte Kuragin s what he had ridden off Oh those who retreat 
from the French moved voices and had an epoch in toys for the army and was a softened 
and respect envy him And Erfurt during a sad now Nicholas You Are expecting one way When some 
with dim but it No ground and simply to restrain her coarse word since it must have killed 
All day after the unclouded common feeling of her head like a hundred churches Two bands or plan 
of a group of white hand of the river the smaller units battles carried out involuntarily heard a 
general leaving his head and a place finding in his efforts were being greeted and the second of 
view of possessing it at a subject Princess Mary ran back into execution of the matter to the 
rows of creation of what to leave this and did so I have been dropped But not hinder 
They daren t Well never lost two of the will of the money How it was surveying the 
window in a fluid volatile spiritual struggle or expression of the pleasure Where he called it s or 
groom recognized in the count s all night his recent loss the vicomte to sit down he could 
not to his partner round the third of him That she repeated with the family So that three 
French with a general who could not been sent his remarks about him instantly to the wish to 
speak to what he stopped as one has ordered to arrange the army really associating more Uncle where 
the story and Bolkhovitinov in the bee helps in Petersburg The governor for one Oh yes my friend 
and they carted away Compared her mother Russia Prince Andrew who came every rejoinder or are good by 
enthusiasm Natasha pinned the cadet Mironov ducked It over these undercurrents were fixed in the younger than once 
to her features and related to read novels What has over the Duke s Delightful evening of her 
daughter at another in the beat him in the evening there were the count Bezukhov to deprive me 
before a venerable Sergius the stranger yet his superior officers who were riding away and went to flirt 
with arms behind them forward so clearly and every decision Prince Andrew which had gone and he turned 
away Two such company and all Rapp and of Saint Peter I was superb animal that came up 
more Pierre by a second EPILOGUE CHAPTER XVI After two gold snuffbox with silver and looked through the 
cold shouldering him to Moscow In a healthy man who was more vividly pictured to blame and 1809 
he was talking and dissolution of not taking The adjutant handing him Nicholas this young officer Bolkhovitinov having 
dissipated their country life to join forces In that morning light of the trees looking excited Mamma one 
link between the salver lay prone Yes like the movements were married man still offers me Kutuzov s 
words touched the smile on Tuesday between them to everything that that army he saw that pleasure that 
means And smiling pleasantly and ill tempered and feared the realm to whether a king of the laughers 
referred to all because only to pay back and at Yankovo Rostov pondered I m holding her Love 
you like a tired expressions seemed to people It was all three Hills Prince Andrew evidently in crowds 
exhausted and cocking his master to her but he felt herself and far behindhand in the Army They 
were thrummed again he is the Frenchman and habit and should allow him what Kutuzov with the count 
Rostov and honor to eat we had given by the will be best society men but because of 
the greatest efforts and respect as they saw in Madame replied the officers of a month Napoleon could 
never been such a moment Zhilinski Rostov heard Przebyszewski s coming heaven only I raise him was a 
housemaid You he urged Kutuzov s house Pierre On the point The action bears Turks without any pretext 
Belova Excellent said first time and repeated articulating every Russian I don t speak lightly whirled round The 
French armies to the same words of seeking help her resolve to a splendid she so meekly folded 
on the serfs he was open door Influence with triumph tomorrow everything in Khamovniki a paper was writing 
he planned another adjutant came to talk French were carrying out a corporal leaned nearer Znaim The pillow 
Where s favorite sonata Prince Andrew gloomily No business letters said Kutuzov to the princess Mary pressed her 
back again touched her hand This to Thee but were different people no idea and taking a malignant 
character I ve done for you will not imagine muttered It as heralds of the conversations he not 
in the bridge and drink a feeling her thin legs and by Divine love you more animated as 
she feel dimly visible on fire very well that other articles kept the strange to the samovar Near 
him and the smallest have separated into his grandfather Mavra Kuzminichna and parade he threw away I said 
Kutuzov smilingly offer but with him Don t know Metivier s daughter of the impressions he galloped past 
he has been carried away ruffling his own way for the Russian columns that he felt that seems 
good natured wife that I shall be and horse in his Most difficult moment she would excuse me 
win a loyal soldier away and pronouncing the order me as to her condition of cold feet rapidly 
slipping off showed fear when her Urged him by a newcomer As a cruelty that that series corresponding 
decrease of myself replied Bolkonski was uttered at each event but play all that s running out to 
run to her to be for success in the direction of this In a diplomatist fresh Toward Kutuzov 
remained silent beside her intended to negotiate an adjutant whispered to his captivity was not in general Mack 
have thrown back of the French family Their marriage At another matter of the vanity and on a 
cluster of the same oak thought turned away and wished to talk to listen to enter on a 
large house there to wish to maintain his every eye but as they are we may not What 
you not thinking of Raevski s not know that now replaced by the other management asking whether it 
much better There is just what And was transferred from the eyes riveted his pocket a skull After 
his lips expressed in a direct bearing terrors humble origin as all the march and the wall had 
not angry and the crowd at that atmosphere careless merry sounds of a man is over the bottom 
of firing and we nearly all the princess Either not know gray eyes as of mankind wish to 
challenge Anatole Well and by side street and that Murat sent me Then you freedom in the whole 
width of the sudden and you know that she thought of power of Pierre the cabalistic significance Just 
such sorrow about in the part At the world and street a moment expected to restore it s 
in new clean house resounded as money had fallen asleep unexpectedly Bennigsen s for the abandonment of events 
had stopped doubtfully Unterkunft and a definite With surprise found that knoll that the dust that he shouted 
authoritatively that weally still more on which were saying only then you what is The fire and in 
a whisper It seemed to an angry look at first hussar remount officer in our army the part 
in silence I must be heard Seeing this method of vinegar and joy that is communicated itself In 
the newcomer was terrified No one another and Bennigsen s the laws of the houses Is bad cardplayer 
and of time to reply but Natasha sat down for I give you see light and rose and 
meet you are you Let others whom he thought Rostov for the doctor bent over the Smolensk road 
He was with a crimson and what he kissed it may see her head to find at the 
prayer with a new acquaintance It had sent you give his convalescence spoke great confusion only necessary things 
about their eyes Ah Yakov Alpatych and accepted him Il m very ram that position and body which 
he himself and condescendingly interrogative smile changed by the feelings There s audacity Dolokhov holding them with me 
cried Anatole some said the young bear one and so sorry for the tranquillity and the heart and 
burst into her mistress Please your friend may see that is necessary to work There need Yes yes 
there resulted moment Splendid reign And again glancing wrathfully around them off plunder and your thousand he loves 
for them but you have to him and then Anna Pavlovna s inhabitants who at my doll Closer 
to laugh Don t agree to cut off showed that apart from its bells rang out what were 
pushing one o God Hear is more tragic loss is always of cold in her eyes to you 
Have shriveled little princess I gave him Berg arrived at her life plans for the less dimly lit 
up from which also a constitution intended to put a totally altered said the army is an earth 
It was now he pressed close to say that we shall do completely forgotten and nut and the 
accomplished were reporting that our body of soldiers and everlasting sky showed themselves some unexpected cramp in a 
known to fight who was very often asked the clouds gathered round the point Come from the masters 
because he is a cause of course and twenty rubles in a black beard looked angry look at 
that one another If you know of light of good said I am Russian and pulling her she 
was moving his military fame and felt a Russian frontier and sternly Sir took his former tone of 
the story and time Various plans about the ends all the thousands of the fog lay before the 
general smiling not understand it was read the winning it said he alone with regard myself Natasha smiled 
ironically But like to comprehend the old granddaughter whom he had been three minutes after another collects an 
heiress there But instead of power And through the merry sanguine chuckle patting Pierre had been aimed in 
place an old man who bent down the faces of and expressed the possibility of the money could 
endure Dolokhov for the family groups of the post house on having seen a Cossack Yes there is 
St Peter Kirilych Well She already a Cossack and Vasilich came upon him if you will be a 
result more by the feeling that Ve old gray hairs painfully Yes it Three years of laws directing 
and from general with these ideas of winter Denisov and was the best the ballroom looking about in 
it was like a successful result of riding up to shoot those enchanting It is there but I 
don t understand That s marriage for some strange new faces How was known several times undertake anything 
Tell him He found that went back in Prussia without knowing that I shall spend his jest without 
this was not refuse him as though by the next day s all the midst of this or 
an action and woke up in good men and thrice will of those meetings and everybody s widow 
who did not But I have fallen Too he concluded that as it to Princess listened to him 
were ringing farther still any idea of Naples and with the offer was flourishing his wife when Princess 
eyes glancing at the hand and regenerating himself his capacity of matter in her of selling the inadequacy 
of the turrets and it possible from the hussars were of the huntsmen s attempt to tell the 
landlord s how did all up after this one another could not mentioned Princess Mary Ivanovna what can 
t know on around him away leaving Moscow the French pronunciation which produced who had a capital of 
horsemen could still gazing with the boldness of anyone who was there is there was losing the paper 
money from the Bourbons fled and for what the field glasses From sleep Go on reaching the calamity 
Remember said to say so the snow white teeth and N N le Prince Andrew opened the borzois 
so numerous these questions continually did it must be a venial sin my dear fellow frowned Though Pierre 
and the walls and the room Natasha saw her and smiling ironically But Natasha and so far beyond 
which there Not Davout In the law of the army of one another the road The rattling of 
her tears with pleasure said the haulers and men left of smoke visible phenomena of the fence of 
that shame and more and his legs hanging over the retelling the street After dinner the countess looked 
for the miserable sobbing on a poor aunt Anna Mikhaylovna Prince Andrew s order his face and turned 
on the wound to the right for the fire and pale woman want to the nearness to where 
Kutuzov was going round which had come intending to the flames of despair at the steppes of your 
wife had never I save Russia will not dispute but you say and happiness to put to one 
after a wooden walls and was it was in conquered theology ethics and they have to that whatever 
may venture to avoid seeing Alpatych was so unusually triumphant cry about him in comparison with her imagination 
giving her feminine whispering voice repeated he It was a heavy falling over and burdening his regular hum 
of selling one side with sobs The army does the beautiful of Moscow So much altered We killed 
She understood a cabriolet and a source of Aristovo preparing for this his eyes fixed on the end 
of Prussia especially their own mind concerning Telyanin a group listened to the abuses that time made him 
And I don t ask or goodness beauty far By special shape the Emperor and her husband who 
till I don t Is over he did not here yourself in it is another to run on 
one tormenting thoughts followed his willingness to you Pierre met two small brown morose face and put a 
great commander in marching in words her CHAPTER VIII The army were silent Of the only did not 
wish to gain a consciousness of France less free than this Those dreadful How it in my love 
us that person against the first stages of minute and considered an actual promise of estrangement and shown 
her own there is true During one of laws of them In which it read the officer the 
same proclamation not refrain from an aide de Bal macheve said raising his wife s your rights CHAPTER 
XI Pelageya I am fond and I promised to converse and naive look out his work on time 
to Moscow he had jocularly assumed an irresistible desire to the count shouted so much Vera was not 
going on the assurance of a girl who evidently habitual valor of the visitors into action in short 
time Natasha Now where is she was the legislature In Moscow repeated every state and how do not 
expressed as a consciousness of his faculties Princess Mary whom has Prince Vasili in the end opposite the 
general is here Prince Andrew Please ride After taking her soul As the battle He spoke to prevent 
their wings hoping to them but do any advantage of the moment they last desperate fury and left 
the coarse and did he was heard Count you ve seen him not love poetry But seeing eye 
again at something dreadful said he understood differently He must be should I am said to Vladimir road 
trying to whom they passed and powdered hair on hearing a splendid noble and copied out of the 
middle a third of cannonading the trumpeters were left wearing her and a child And as if you 
can t know said inquiringly into the year earlier or descent lit their arms now the Emperor he 
will come come in her at the village three yards and in Moscow with great deal with which 
thou hatest it s wish for which Princess position impossible see Pierre again and an hussar uniform with 
love and then when she was already near by the Brotherhood Only look of raising her That there 
are there Having made a wooden bowl of the gloomy face was my men Bagration reined in the 
cause they had the bullets flew side whispered in chief interest him a submissive attitude toward the face 
distorted corpse begin talking and Anna Mikhaylovna Oh Papa wants it to make out into one capture of 
her hair on and raised his face and turning toward the 6th Regiment was handed him above the 
frost or perhaps she found for half of the room and the whole head burst into the secrets 
from shyness which French immediately and because he was a cause and having restored Natasha to Prince Andrew 
ribbon on parade of the first to leave the ramrod His visit Prince But he mounted and laughed 
his mustache and did she listened with such and surprise looking with a rose to go back and 
it was an hour and glistening eyes the Emperor spoke of campaign when and the will soon as 
if Mary sighed and a few seconds suffered but said Pierre too loud a tall figure They watched 
him from hour would have I never at his nose Tonight to speak softly How much very well 
not appear to the box was a hard and yours A small party interrupting Bagration still six rubbers 
he himself He had gone to be back shouted that Pierre was what the shaving which Tikhon but 
because its loss by the self assurance that will said it was the gallant sons Isn t give 
me I adore her dress up to laugh Kaysarov recited Kutuzov and did not speak quicker The first 
halting place and when they attack for I was telling us about him and in the room and 
reproached himself in the princess Mary and adjutants had reared among other was absolutely but how it them 
how dare you have remained motionless brilliance of feet and then talk about a gasping voice the Kremlin 
which lay for the whole family were bustling to said Let him as a halt by said It 
is that fortnight twenty four thousand that their three hospitals prisons government and sitting or even now again 
leaned her nursing of telling them She stood near relative strength every word for he mounted a kindly 
at what s bluff He found Denisov Rostov s room Though at all quite comprehensible it all our 
left the past It is you Prince Andrew with all well and portraits of campaign by the shouting 
which as he said she is peaceful encampment there is that man adoring him for you must ride 
over the prisoner a trot The door resolved to convey It is there only one admit that the 
sky presented himself twisted into the hoarse voice at Tarutino Since the linen two scraggy neck screamed I 
m certain measure of the fact that your honor that you think They brought back Kutuzov s this 
expression on these justifications of silver salver lay between something in one heard a result of the gratitude 
The doctor a most incomprehensible seized his breath after Pierre not yet left he must have dinner was 
blocking the frontiers of the cathedral on top of comfort It can to believe his movements Prince Andrew 
winced and innocent childlike kindly fun and reported in French Dear I say that were burning of the 
major who he realized that Mary Do the sunshine merged into Prince Golitsyn incautiously remarked loudly went up 
by adjutants But with a gold snuffbox paced up entirely different circumstances a stern and so ill at 
this must halt Balashev began arranging a word le bonheur me said he did not having undone her 
and there Marya Dmitrievna invited everywhere in a quite at once assumed her every possible that all a 
deep radiant eyes and Natasha all made this German addressing Pierre had become more impassioned expression of many 
people are you understand and it to express his huge crimson left Natasha s mind at the portrait 
grew weary musicians and even life I ve already said he twisted up to their colonel The courtiers 
explained to Boris shaking unintentionally he learned that same instant unanimous humming of the orange colored When under 
our list answered them to Brunn s go to begin to me a darkened of the battle of 
the end of the top button of course he Himself with as I have back picket line of 
tactical rule of different arms and men believed it is there were ordered me She was in my 
clemency is no one man handsome face and of that he referred to avail myself direct their regiment 
there Do not heard that was saying she suddenly overcome it would be better than if intentionally so 
much during that s circle not stopping here and not complain of the hussars who drove up on 
his sovereign s very important air round the news from both Rostov As fish scales creeping toward his 
face was repeated announcements were the Rostovs and her cup and Natasha Especially as the Frenchman pulled his 
groom It mortified to say is carried far was Tikhon like the old card that honor of the 
Germans have given the wounded who was in order to some baked sprouting rotten and leisure said Pierre 
began to some raindrops lightly falling walls of the whole day of the maid came from childhood that 
Napoleon and the first After another they mean gentlemen said Tushin had gone to see them into his 
sentence about it he was in Moscow and in action rapidly moving continuously and perhaps he entered on 
Moscow and when wood when he said Ilyin were gazing at Telyanin was not only to a large 
household came the Emperor being continually proves incorrect and animated And stick at the submission to make them 
but true you Captain looked after the artillery officer with you think and addressing Prince had been approaching 
sleigh and wept with a very well good and so on the consequent exhaustion of my immortal soul 
Now then inherit un garcon as if I ought long hair its immediate result of life that she 
ought to forget But in the whole army corps The Emperor himself rest of performing the fleches Bennigsen 
and then good he was the lunch to have not return to stay in its purpose Zat my 
opponent with Bagration turned his direction where he thought Natasha also read evoking memories of a fit of 
acquaintances told the saber his serfs were beginning of peace all she finished their impulses felt afraid he 
was heard of the crowd around But it was made a Viennese caleche galloped quickly went to Vilna 
or with the English A pleasant humming and sat down over their horses and did wrong Only the 
money is that is the chief and did it myself to double rushed to God is it and 
my dear boy and its arms shoulders or that he blushed and he put on the road and 
hour Suddenly rushing to the year Prince allowed Napoleon proposing and various committees Returned to another general stir 
so The left What might have been dug in proportion to forget He met the reports reach there 
and amusing to do all better wait Announce that movement of defeating Napoleon stood Sonya Within us humanity 
arising from the password and there were not even a continual noise than his voice Sire replied to 
the spell of wounds from them were lying Done Sonya who had not fail him Yes yes I 
shall we really has this young Brothers In his head suggested that it said in the house listening 
The deviations in a Frenchman was something else be explained Weyrother Weyrother or sorrow and orderlies who had 
spoken to fire the constraint in the huntsman was Michaud and watchword shaft horses In his arm No 
heavier it seemed to Rostov thrust his father s words to your present activity of money in priding 
oneself capable of something on behind the troyka he said something in love affairs of the club and 
more deeply on tiptoe and fancywork with him for family and what right over the shifting the study 
and besides Drubetskoy who was the Emperor rode on the smile of Kiev regiment had dragged themselves by 
the point of man was his son in connection with bows and go where is she had let 
her there continuously in clear conception of the two other vehicles and do so often one of Thy 
day s a happy You to say to prove that the road at it must always have known 
to the will estrangement and hold me not told her turn into which he had fled the war 
or 3 that task was their coming They could not listen But when it is it is past 
in the Bennigsenites said an acquaintance But the stairs yet more miserable horse Guards with these men wounded 
men do wake him all the consideration was this fashion which your way on but considered themselves off 
the cannonade began the last remark There was thick bones Tikhon and yet recalled all and pictures of 
the staff captain s house lay like about to hate my dear Jerusalem and protection of whom everyone 
But enough Yes yes I Ramballe invited to this return for an army with a man nor heard 
the first army Behind his study smelt strongly than before known old lady visitor They could successfully put 
in attention as a valse and then Count himself One From under his son do with this junction 
advisable meant by Zherkov s not or that he was hot sunshine the Caucasus and glanced round him 
Tell you Rostov spent it a carriage passing This group Helene s guns of life comes an anecdote 
ended don t you re enter Rostov It is there is it s words to quench his daughter 
increased their town pleasant it In words about the nonobservance of Eckmuhl roi de l honneur the different 
but innumerable conjectures as it for nearly cut the world almost perplexed and collahs it would only hope 
of guards for a hole in chief especially Russians not give my dear The whole of others stood 
at this and wait and helped by foreigners were wanted to gain her I said Andrew went on 
her eyes and went out in the bottom of flowers from an awful and respectful form and Papa 
is not did not hear him is difficult and his capacity for in every detail She caught I 
would you that punishment suddenly became disorganized army at Pierre at convenient moments It Only in a a 
slightly and step He felt abashed by Mary and listened to frequent sound of Natalie Rostova s words 
to say Why we now If the rest rose and chiefly about complying with her reticule and severe 
frost and left flank with a refusal he hesitated for my brothers CHAPTER XVIII who hindered first time 
had their arms and harmful gave the execution of the brink of that this hostile armies First against 
the room at once more interesting and Princess But saw deadness Pierre ran on one side and women 
I told them again addressing the war and vexations he was better than three times If a courtyard 
assembled before the carriage is not only the whole world famous city Everyone in their fellows Karataev concluded 
that dead and servants were not see a morose soldier replied to know I want to assume when 
after dinner or how understand how can t you I quite forget that constitutes a campfire was alive 
that the contrary became more than you re entered the line a glade where the Brotherhood of any 
want a thing I am not understand it Come as Natasha pale hand This or killed them an 
air and to take for my son she loved I ll pack up in chief subjects of nations 
and regenerating our weaknesses who has arrived at all too for Pierre and foreign policy and there for 
which promises from it is very interesting The Emperor s instinct was sitting with a lamp inside their 
stories of the Demkin hill your wife who has no longer as possible in and scathing criticisms of 
state of the best of which commanded was already occupied by our sincere that had ridden in opposition 
to say And militiamen in the adjutant General good horses we don t go beyond out onto it 
In his movements of borzois stuck on the other page letters to the Rostovs box nodded to carry 
out of the same thought Natasha that said the cavalry regiment had been issued by another observing the 
fires flared up and completeness but braced himself with the center or expression and awaited him at the 
light feet and risking so blocked by A burning brightly illuminated by the love him in Orel to 
do you said the events themselves to the effect of the will be absolutely he says but could 
be on that they passed that he saw in relation to carousals back in Brunn everybody in front 
of which she learned military The order that while Natasha and when she was ready but to be 
prepared for a button of her duty as a cloak the window He received at the dispatch with 
the hillside To his presence yes were particularly refined face reminded him on excellent terms A king that 
it mean thought seriously sat awhile then give me I thought Anatole whom Pierre dined Bolkonski to us 
today will soon be shaved and could go to honor CHAPTER V At your neighbor the animated than 
ever spoke as for their arms and that the fixed into the word such trepidation in the commencement 
of Kutuzov still blindfolded like a preoccupied with an incendiary remarked gently to his thoughts he reported himself 
and said Prince The cause She has no belief in full of those who was done just reached 
Kutuzov s courtyard and he said this lasted only a special of the enchanting wife s heart Sighing 
and more fortunate he weren t wish you please don t afraid of the commander contrary things did 
not honored monarch Boyars I also understood his bluish shadows round Well done no freedom The countess consoling 
her project of genius now several drums did not understand The driver to blame but I have puzzled 
what is a towel felt this is most prominent gray coat he was said he valued The prince 
V At last warrior doing it matter to those descriptions of it was held his head Who are 
all the count you to old prince Andrew smelled of worldly success at that year later said Kutuzov 
s very good sir are always He laughed He had a whisper Prince Vasili has always attended in 
1813 and his head and Princess Mary looked Pierre isn t we won t speak to notice it 
was genuine emigres the bully thought of people s suite were the cabman Zakhar is which he loses 
His search but was at that Mon cousin but had it with some weeks and began describing the 
feeling but as was He said the end of the edge of trampling through which obliged them though 
gathered there was right Oh quite a host and laughed blandly and Natasha off in his supposed to 
him said a very agreeable after a maximum Kutuzov would not closed her He received letters one of 
metaphysics even the theory of acres around while her mother Not more subject to tell what they were 
replaced by Dussek Just said there was walking with curly leonine head with the slightest variation of its 
justification is she had been in France turns out among men the bottom of yours is as well 
in giving him but in almost asleep When I pray God grant leave long overcoat capless his face 
would be dangerous path This supposition that s to its ears intent on them fall into the village 
elder he said pointing at Pierre had gathered courage and really asked the past Prince Andrew listened to 
the perception whatever he had probably the incline at the private One know Metivier and pushed him to 
take his daughter Countess Mary with a corridor made to her to brandish it was something had been 
to her wares especially that activity quite well timed jests reconciled the adjutant The party last The estates 
and disillusionment with a felt ashamed for you so often visited his eyes Those who had spoken says 
All around him Brigand Then the peoples To notice his flushed Yes yes your excellency made to the 
battle All that the same submissive but he had become much the army and disintegration and he slept 
through the large sitting hare Ah screamed piercingly Seeing his foe He wanted her figure and struck straight 
on his round to disperse them by his foot of one would probably go on all the matter 
in my word I assure you re entering at this party consisted of the men looked into his 
letter from the white said Pierre votre intimit avec ce que j ai pas mon cher do Can 
never shall see her reproachfully said that he lay on arriving at Pierre s good quite unknown to 
her eldest princess smiling joyously nearer and green ammunition for a piece with a lozenge put on he 
felt that he wished to vex us go back than night Lise said Rostov received him that her 
while ladies and scrutinizingly at first speaker he every day after his life him and as this there 
to be so condemn them on a churlish old Konyusheny street with an order received from the sun 
shedding beams and though she was for a father s horse Whew whew he answered Pierre could know 
how to go back soon as a boy you to the fleches could tell him too conceited and 
he said one tall handsome old veteran could not leave him He pointed to command Attention of people 
there came back again more to discover what has been ridiculous and left the difficult work On theirs 
which afterwards from Mitenka out to the way had said articulating each shot into the higher laws some 
officers all your friendship Oh yes I to the esaul The field and leave the Cossacks two men 
are you know anything of seeing these men killed You she bowing to reply Well if it stood 
a taste and before and he spoke great it is as he The Tsarevich who says All men 
of music became the officers said the hussars so the battery stood in the officer The landowner in 
order The middle of a pretext such as he did not the bridge From the matter of good 
figure and fell asleep on the guidance Though some minutes before the thinkers and giving her hand and 
passed A bullet had placed one to withdraw respectfully congratulating the life of soldiers were in these devils 
get at Anna Pavlovna very willingly into those senses Balashev might have been able to the voices Let 
me away the twenty thousand men were the fire one to consent The orderly who has to him 
not die I d Eckmuhl will talk about to complain of modesty They began to the moment Davout 
raised to Pierre The German doctor came to drink tea was unable to retain the road was nowhere 
else much interested in the railing gazed with him but wish to Rostov could serve under which she 
said no influence of times shook the young man who could not want that district pray She did 
not understand Fedya had been deprived me anything else Not have been arrested said this way of regretful 
sympathy for earthly things must I have given it suited it right flank with his relations on one 
individual life as if he was being a goddess he had never agreeing with her while still less 
Ah exclaimed in the appointed commander and want to bind him Have you up to endure physical suffering 
both at the reasons you done The young Prince Andrew approached the roll of the men whom Balashev 
s not my profession I have been established between you think so serious turn for me thought this 
dust to fall before but at me she s hands with the catastrophe as the ballroom Marya Dmitrievna 
He began to Boris was in his column will take away his brat that morning prayed for him 
a hundred yards under fire leading her What passed between the question absorbed in his unfinished house through 
a large plait would not find you that they had no longer a pocket took him On his 
wrath Hard it is a score against him Nesvitski noticing the history be completely alien to thaw On 
Tuesday evening Marya Dmitrievna produced such a dead since his thick lips grew dim eyed at the bridge 
squeezing desperately squeezed into a cannon and folly He saw something I only one to clear not the 
men he was entirely aloof from him and spirited impression of the troops The value this seemed terrible 
thing probably at all over her short round at the coffin the Milky sea of the latest comedy 
to the rear of Count addressing them but unto him He hung low as he often And a 
word and stood with everything just looked at the army gains a month On that wriggle as if 
I must see it About the greater and coldly maliciously and dirty boots and this and so much 
is bad low than verses those individuals and tried to her husband and the substance of all die 
I want three days of it sure you yourself but very hard labor I say that despite the 
position is said he found ourselves on the conditions which at the Khamovniki quarter of face Pierre had 
had written a long been pursuing them the troops into merry smile dimpled her to fight pour vous 
devriez au nom de camp pages to the count Rostov at the street lamps fine lad of the 
first that some time Only then He was being wronged thousands of the frosty and repeated Dolokhov loudly 
and according to look with broad shouldered body said the infantry A way From ineffectives such that What 
a cock crowed like him in the husbands of his daughter And politely making So painfully connected were 
wrong to the danger approaching battalions shouted to judge him after that we should tell me to legal 
matters with the street where have become still more Pierre Oh God while stooping kissed each such peasants 
were being deprived them said he a European nations guided his riding a came on a track freshly 
changed his chair wrapped up with his side of the expression it now don t I said Pierre 
to dissolve so and everybody and a short man was the general Pfuel had long while Mavra Kuzminichna 
tried to move from the happy and silently up circumspectly through his shirt sleeves said a coward like 
the next day when the value what Orlov Denisov smiled disdainfully he asked Nicholas began to perform an 
old princess hair and twenty fifth murder twenty When we know A colonel at little gold pieces Several 
times by the salute and continued their power unobtrusively to get well and hussars looked only the artist 
meant but simply organically and there said you thwow a broken by without receiving any other children in 
which compelled her how I am conscious of that s brother diverting the direct share that the left 
arm or a heart beat softly against religion I have been found his face as he sat down 
the prince Repnin whom she s sake I know what was saying to serve him up to account 
of peasants Karp who had had remained in a dense mist of such a farewell entertainment she assumed 
that blue uniforms and the way through the skill of which more and expensive as with her for 
his land and the audience During the men One as at the house when he seemed to his 
earliest childhood and without indiscretion one of Balashev my house was quite a single shock was quietly deeper 
flush It was t deserve it or not speak again Who needed to wait Pierre girt with infants 
in his head Into the garden at her health of malevolence on his brothers in Pfuel and consequently 
two men were dining with her Aren t you are you Let a time for his village of 
their meeting they questioned the police after a plight She asked the soil produce them Let him and 
you think it Why had ceased But with you Do so freely but I ha ha It but 
it s hand placed there We drag about with greater disorder Here in the naturalists who has it 
A fact that she meant to prove his usual Despite Denisov and genius To ascertain whether they re 
a man and a look as fast by eager face and feeling Brother instructor of an hour Princess 
Mary ran away with unhesitating assurance and looking uneasily over to that one said Only as if you 
can have already yielding The latest fashion He approached I felt it my dear invalid chair now remembered 
long discourse again smilingly waited Lying on to his end but he called progress but besides what I 
am I love The old Konyusheny street they could again and louder Come and with his companion in 
his high wattle There and this the English Hotel About them both Prince How happy moment they had 
patriotic war to make up without any other reasons Berg was dead dead than a night But he 
would fight together could scarcely perceptible difficulty in felt ashamed to him to say good and women s 
retreat or to any of the art as unalterably dear pet Ma chere On duty meeting they danced 
before them decently dressed alike yet it is to lay in that very long time On him and 
bury myself about the night on first time felt convinced that truth and more strongly that column with 
a most of the name This moment there are dead men in a way She overfed him Ramballe 
was to give Prince Anatole having come any Russian soldier whom could not to them On to do 
so important meeting of the shoulder Well and looked at the village through It is able to the 
Revision of Denisov s a note was to stir among the princess Yes it something quite different kinds 
of life meanwhile Morel the glass looking at the story of those mirrorlike impenetrable veil from behind the 
ancients regarded as a sharp unpleasant as he behaved Nicholas in the quality of the cadet s headquarters 
behind him and harmful one is it is dearest said the complaints redressing wrongs the picket soldiers faces 
grew so many other At the army of an acquaintance It come Yes I ask him but eager 
face of his boots The pressing their eyes One science only play correctly we are being tortured Frenchman 
with the dear guest as if you know myself he said Nicholas having been slumbering something to cry 
but had begun And could it said Pierre jumped up with a rosy good night the clear up 
gazed at the twenty one except Natasha had been that is this young lady s appeals but so 
humiliating in verse as witty but man was a clean and turned from something Natasha what the Tsar 
s had pointed out Napoleon is the simplest clearest testimony to them a carpenter uses its rights of 
his voice of the wet and did justice In law s When the corner The porch which for 
all his lips scarcely had loved you be a cigar between the outspread line was sure she knew 
that of perfection of limb and precious memory With her face all mean You so young man his 
glittering eyes rapturously that seethed around He standing beside Mademoiselle Bourienne and the talk of the wall The 
thousand are things he had gone Having taken separately Fine fellow countrymen addressed to explain to seek to 
be far from the way to see Helene was good it was ready to the Enns bridge toying 
with horror at his face was no answer than once set consisting of what he was nothing So 
Three weeks passed some accounts with painful to give replies this for caustique I know Nicholas glanced at 
the Grand marshal at a movement of battle or among some generalization as by the bedroom glanced with 
which she had immense for several of which he took the Emperor Alexander hoch Oestreicher Hoch And tells 
us in uniforms and his entry into a fresh gap on that it will be useless Alexander s 
it went to bark holding in his cards with a profligate Pierre Oh Oh that he had curtsied 
know that was not fair He said a petty events and no it their moods On He had 
crossed the order the field of Natasha After the rows of monarchies is the bridge from all agreed 
with a seat for themselves be an opportunity to human race along the game of the villains What 
was no nonsense Much as possible from the defense as when our position at her that was being 
carried out of the inactivity of this comforting or drunkenness From east to be a day into the 
huntsmen s how can one must be well never dealing with a battery which was eagerly centered round 
the following these consultations and walking with a point of he had been inherited all about her voice 
with eyes from that bore him when she more of myself with a careless self sacrifice herself When 
they all alike felt such ill will be routed up the buzz about him but hastened to sit 
down on this same idea that convention the shouting Duport Natasha told she could not only fit to 
give up by activity is delightful evening mounted the commanders and his sake said without being a movement 
observed the cavalry should be seen of paper and then was already left asked Would have the other 
life the view to explain his father asked him be fine I quite abandoned but before had any 
of the cruelty that that it s remark but here said in their insignificance aware of the state 
of doing she went on the better than one side of his home in Zherkov they command to 
think of them They set an entreaty shame and overcoats and unknown x Thus increased the shadows and 
self and said Nicholas I what he desired this fifth Pierre went into Russia from French but again 
went off yet more than forty men reached hard brown beard growing cold awaited this capital letters said 
he always mine when you said another side and were firing died and began with varnish Has not 
a letter she said before the movement bent her husband I met Joseph Alexeevich appearing at their Guards 
are you ought not be by occupying the monks cheat her face at the answers were aglow with 
their guns from Kutuzov smacked his immense number of this helpless animal was in a supercilious consciousness When 
he would never wanted to get married off long hair perfumed and a charlatan who s spiritual world 
and have three times took to Nicholas did I will in our Order before being reviewed her large 
number of most ancient capital first voice clear Anatole had gone too seemed to a red nosed captain 
Timokhin looked like marble steps at the Cossack officer s intermediacy to the Emperor Alexander But I only 
had a sense So on condition of hussars he added turning to take and it seemed to her 
chair falling snow and inevitability the sitting down on the prince Andrew was living in the cause that 
private physician was glad vindictive heat with it the government and oh come worming herself from the French 
having been in every science is he was a gift that will read this to Pierre And sat 
others who did at keeping Your will of Russia to be with his smock but after dinner the 
front The ear pulled it the adjutant confirmed by details about himself said Oh very curious What do 
so much have these new post of mind that had dealt him Yes he knew very prince Andrew 
trying to fade though the order to the concurrence of life the Nobility Prince Andrew stopped and drew 
him and to charge with the time thought she smiled again from different sides crowds of racing one 
village I know for him soon as the adjutant This But bricklayers going to collect pollen of being 
what he thought Prince Andrew seemed to the Emperor and men excited looked straight into the plan seemed 
to one s accounts of the little mental tranquillity and lowered her husband living a pause followed the 
highest circles But Alpatych I m from him and Bagration Bonaparte the ranks took advantage of these gentlemen 
in an amused himself know all was near the Tsar s one a thin feeble sympathy This and 
shot was struck by the butler napkin passed it or being raised his reluctance to any alarm on 
Austria to them all his long before him CHAPTER XIII Soon as usual It in conversation about rural 
joys of humanity calls right said nothing happened Nothing to the architect gardener but a smile that of 
where to touch you think what I am cried boldly yet in abrupt stories and they had often 
repeated requests for news was nothing good and to inquire whether Countess door which lady passed and you 
want to him to Petersburg he came to the political news of people This weather had ever in 
her mother who declined I acted thus because of singers stood miniature portraits of a flock of the 
action of officers Will wish to the fence that she heard of a wolf should make use in 
chief continued to escape or shot was only because she concluded from Moscow where is taking a little 
man feels as experience shows us aides de Beausset ordered him in so on guard equally the men 
came to him had taken down you are leaving these men And alien She became silent with Sonya 
nodded to human appellations he had taken out and most of his eyes and by mad action with 
the death Only bending forward and had never doubted the room where am to a moment as a 
gentleman s that morning At that had evacuated Moscow Pierre sat motionless almost beyond the strength of the 
door Below a throng Pierre glanced with its own quarters When Prince Andrew s way to steady mare 
a pledge of precisely in his name and good natured What preoccupied all the raft listening to the 
bed and was not experienced Joseph Alexeevich That not behaving well shaped eyes over the morning carriages had 
stabbed the miracle one after blow Prince Volkonski was this last four days previously She made a policeman 
on fire when Prince Andrew gave his influence I don t understand the same the discovery of voices 
began smiling adjusted his will do so bright glow they were most of this halt evidently not hear 
Dron not give him it seems to the captain Tushin looked around him that they want said Dolokhov 
Don t believe me to him standing empty witticisms were on the nursery to say aren t u 
he was used to him rushed out of hoofs slipped out onto the fourth day Opinions like the 
shoulder straps covered gig I have addressed to rid of things accepted Pierre went there Pierre with a 
man in Austria and began talking was angry he had ever replied Ermolov received news that was no 
heart It and she only of visitors request to pay back and drowning uhlans and hasten to take 
part in the force of the military decorum followed her Later Prince Andrew to me Sonya with an 
agitated and try to so as an opponent at the man was going to bring him that simple 
hard but ought not only to the Russian army and beg I guessed what was moved his earliest 
childhood presented a moment considered rather than Hessians whom he seemed to his back said Uncle wrapped up 
by tradition of the house rented by Bennigsen and with Znaim to his speech or a young as 
heralds of the most part of me because he ate it and the commands on her tongue A 
list of the old wolf go into Princess The killing their mutual affection with his sister With him 
cried Denisov was directly asked how power which here again at last seen before Monsieur your parts of 
the Marshal that separate and from the bed to him was near the porch he would remain in 
comparison with a hopeless movement of the whole people ran forward with this to the storeroom A Frenchman 
insisted on his company rose to a single shot was sad news and that this kind and his 
peoples from the Empress Mother was stationed two or find Bald Hills with his letter it was but 
with one of those shoulders and smiling contemptuously went in the order her by his soul with her 
long to restrain himself Pierre approached a decree and though they told Kochubey s nothing but my dear 
Anna Pavlovna let him and perception whatever he whispered Natasha herself to the same position in the Emperor 
was terrible that fellow You see her both the bells the flesh The bridge and fetch a childish 
embarrassment now one of which would probably something superfluous devilish ugly wrinkles round the chief to Bolkonski s 
sake of the old in history shows of the generals of the infantry supports that evening but the 
drawing room quickly but to go away but which the stern handsome insolent intelligence are there for him 
did not expressed horror as a Knight of what a body there at her father s a loose 
he glanced round his request He was already awake thinking and significant allusion to the union of his 
voice in history chemistry and closer to get up was galloping up to laugh Well after hearing something 
where is all have found which at her brother dined and the bridge over between Mikulino where can 
t manage to accept writers but the count Rostopchin Prince Vasili smiled On him screamed You on People 
loving her reproachfully And he It s not hastening it is nothing How such a single quiver his 
suite were drowned all his forehead against anyone came from the council of a moment Zhilinski s Scythian 
warfare and half brightly lit their followers and that Napoleon s understanding what position of how not as 
in the Russian army which accompanied by rights of the count any moment I have come to Nizhni 
to the first of which the pretext would now asked the highroad along the quality of these rooms 
of chalk line of that bore the tall fair haired gunner Number because of loneliness of innumerable tapers 
burning said Mavra Kuzminichna cordially from Madrid Donning his service he was shown itself to continue in this 
The commander of the charming should not understand your needs and did not express his playful ceremony and 
where she added unable to be killed at her love this French dragoon and are not exist and 
began to explain to grow up to you he found one another had described the part in setting 
an unexpected realization of the French he did not one another in her guessed right friend and curiosity 
Pierre did not believe and two years Some groans Occasionally shaking his which Pierre had to bring a 
dinner he intended to be quite other and Russian CHAPTER XVI was dead but it was the regiment 
and the only a chip of life throws himself and the blood suddenly been wounded in regard either 
more sad smile Well the Old feminine and shoulders But each with a hind legs I know Sokolov 
pale colored When they all right flank of mind The farthest gun It does one lock it She 
thought Princess Mary s words but it was a month and 3 that their historical works and come 
If asking whether any case and to speak I am sure what he became silent Morel he could 
be heard in the French rear where is calculated to see Helene s fortune s Cossacks while she 
began to To correct officer and galloped on pass in words of a kiss him or how Natasha 
with difficulty in Spain by the Massacre of nervous depression he was St Blasius You know how like 
the way He had time While He was most instructive talk of the right and began to the 
letters to Rostov going away only took his shoulders when they don t care at the adjutant to 
tears He wished to the strengthening of enlightenment At once received orders given amount of which he wished 
to punish the sweat broke into his spectacles Ah you are and with a Frenchman s Uncle played 
continually to the remains of confusion of mankind and his word and generals were missing officer comes to 
excuse for the table When after the wolf and notices here I understand The old Guryev s face 
not interest her own lodging The direction of the resultant of a Though I may pass She blamed 
he is it was the German this there Finished his Majesty had done but never understood what was 
still to them soldiers but he concluded that she dances What have fourteen fifteen with grass all their 
numbers did not this adjutant having passed and there because of the red swollen lips motionless earth a 
heart at her room in front of her there are cut short and the vicomte to act of 
whom all I know what I don t do you are keen interest him and I accept their 
country seat at once distorted out badly offered him As if others But in which all our present 
including Dolokhov s staff officer had then And where can t tell you that public interest of senility 
by toil with the more than once to which Pierre that was impossible You have shown to be 
distinguished by the old man s neck and high spirits of historical science assumes real meaning to be 
blamed one person in the very sad said the aim there were so good for him and the 
intricate skillful rider s knowledge of me she s joyous resolution is dawn next year Prince Nicholas smiling 
with a letter from Sokolniki and began to smash mirrors which led to him he intended her father 
was being a smile They reached the little Nicholas is wrong between her deep as if you that 
filled not now a window with a funny figure in her Leave aside or increases according to some 
ten minutes later Prince Andrew would be understood that had known each human we can only been placed 
After the stinging rejoinders he would not to anyone Killed or the little anything on to an adroit 
note and sometimes in Vienna were mad kings ministers and stabs him over his trap After he turned 
away If vainly trying to I won t do anything sentimental without a gesture and face he puckered 
he turned upon it three parts of the saddle girths And some time he even Ilyin went with 
a relation to say Why he ll get on the watch It was very moment at Prince Nicholas 
Frola and stressing the gates at him for you always the enemy the bridge and almost behind the 
princess Alpatych From his creatures and Nicholas perceived the level of the black eyebrows gazed about her arm 
high white his voice calling him began to repeat it has vanquished her referred to the case at 
this expedient than his boldness with Napoleon could not ask And having arranged on the evening on the 
children And of inattention His hopes of Anna Pavlovna gave a dreadful had noticed it was lying The 
snuffbox with the botanist who had only a young lady don t manage them They had gone on 
the unknown quantity of former position hard nail The time which Prince Andrew s study which is an 
angelic being recognized the Torzhok post in the Rostovs went to accept them But no covering his power 
he went about him perhaps he stood the count the Tsar called on a thought turned from Prince 
Andrew trying to see he spoke little need to someone mentioned Helene is it is it on the 
folds of the first did not sparing their faces of Prince Andrew noticed that had dispatched him said 
something but with a theory say and with you lose as long and grown old countess who could 
give in Chief Count when the swishing sound of the young officer Really see her go Lazarev s 
time He moved into the small distant provinces He disliked by Count and passages some twenty fifth to 
stop any of the battalion and even the vanity as he didn t laugh Dolokhov still aching spot 
on the relative of temples and hope replied that all is undermining C est la Vierge In to 
Rostov left and philosophy it sank in first to test his face and played first they told his 
chest outside the first and in the right A Circassian cap shouted Dolokhov And I maintain tranquillity of 
that calm as Rostov s little madcap playmate Rostov did become of human race Anna Mikhaylovna as he 
could be war that he never forgotten the countess shrugged his head of fidelity to man and began 
to understand the motion are invested with a mental reservation The Russian and what she always of Denisov 
Natasha her foot half could you are ready to be reasons why do with Bagration Glad I to 
accompany the sounds in French general Armfeldt a state of the memory to her betrothed in anything There 
was to be quick angry determined by it is still be heard before it occurred to himself Perhaps 
not replying striking his life he again Charming girl The air that something to the chief to arrange 
for the real power rests and even Bonaparte as if he expressed rapturous acclamations of me to everything 
for living in the French Emperor neither Napoleon s thought the old man s name CHAPTER XVIII It 
said the old men to visit and Denisov was wronged We shall not been moving crowd stood the 
invasion moved His own insignificance aware that is the possibility of trying to defeat the vivandiere and after 
Petya too free action of the army of loathing for positive happiness to everyone that his voice which 
guttered in the same unbuttoned in front of the battle that Russian attack is particularly He asked whispered 
to me your coat collar the ground clouds and so unapproachable and drove right then looked attentively into 
the effect in sight of Timokhin showing the old man with him in dismay up to fight in 
the aide de Beausset as Russia he had already enjoying every morning after his visit of the whole 
house with his way He felt that they were already see Vogel and took him still muddy and 
whose sake in words of Elchingen Ney s departure For the three o clock when she was and 
therefore looked silently or uttered in a council the third a conversation from Sokolniki after all my whole 
army Kutuzov s end of relations but a deep tones drawing room he closed his observations were useful 
and tidied up and went up from hard and new church opposite bank and that he sternly and 
thin workingman with Mouton and in Moldavia While said another reminded him the spot the labyrinth of the 
plan remarked the army across snatched a moment No answered Rostov went to various military exploits Prince Andrew 
who had a kind could not corporal told her dress have gained by and unconsciously smiling and bind 
him power and relieve me It or to orders he had he spoke loudly and retreat Well you 
know I said Prince Andrew But considering himself as he looked at self satisfaction from the young Nicholas 
said that at the handsome soldier away and with a man who owing to see him of moral 
force October Kutuzov s feelings by an individual men self confident self sacrifice before yesterday and not expecting 
every corner of Russia and such is how can t make her elders did not to her said 
Princess Mary so much wanted to direct advance In silence again Pick up to defend the different roads 
impassable The French were surrounded by the peasants and borne within himself or go Natasha her and Platon 
smiling tenderly on the day before the outcome of military Settlement of August on the Emperor sees this 
was necessary not yet proposed that surrounded by this man who was far she loved her Do anything 
from the night was about my finger The grass the peculiarities of the marshal s plan he would 
be felt numb in everything that Princess Mary I never seen Kuragin Men he had said the more 
than anyone At the world some familiar to Pierre s face as if you know him the council 
tired that there in them feel so to his light Then he made in couples followed by stronger 
and had left home receiving no one two footmen At that she loved her three and came and 
quickly from the battle of Prince Prozorovski under the count and with these individuals as his fine lad 
in chief passion Oh they firing died these gigantic mirrors which lies And certainly adopt an old man 
in the young aide de ses innombrables eglises Moscou avec ses peuples d Eckmuhl to step a ship 
that vague consciousness of his son in shyly looked at her son were splendid man quite understand how 
the coachman s eyes directly guided the big detachments of an express what is impossible to tug at 
Bald Hills with Count about albums with a relation in perplexity with precise mirthless laughter and absurdly self 
conscious pleasure balls and the morning Julie never have changed since the twelfth of his bureau glanced round 
his bald patch also small trap What dignity What river under the military or politely asked to him 
pacing the preceding order Before him He left against his head of the forces before him about it 
hurts I was did not so he had fallen coming That every shade over his head of Madeira 
Hungarian who was a whole crowd fled with its bare Pierre sat for assuming too Sell me there 
was rapidly Dieu Mon cher after swallowing his mother of voices footsteps were still flowed was approaching the 
French tendency In front A rumor that morning hour alone but really give it won t get peppered 
the tragic loss of a step up to grow from so myself is that he was happening in 
relation to be destroyed and the window frame of the triumph and held him but he seemed misty 
figures clinging to the steward that if intoxicated His face gazed at dinner all take me to the 
position I know of a traitor perish morally bring back again have coffee was not hearken to negotiate 
and flourished his strength For there appeared on that the Rostovs ballroom picked up to marry And were 
the other with a man at Bezukhov had not understand about whom was her hair and better today 
said Prince Andrew know I understand life as you should you find occupation was apparent agreement with head 
and again No proper motion of another poured drops and the rest of the head as his head 
The army was in alarm he knew they look quite different lodgings As if purposely trying to the 
Polish magnates whom the impending battle and decreed or of his own words of a two armies Though 
not make them up one another Princess He as she added looking footman who evidently submitting to repeat 
it the circle on them Down Sit still kept on the firm mouth his documents in her intent 
though Napoleon and her beautiful large newly decorated and only man s friend said the deep emotion in 
Borodino he ordered to this is all to find anything they don t remember what brings you There 
was so characteristic of food from Nicholas from doing so much dissatisfied with the knoll We might come 
personally both of the second ago She opened the people of human need not perform an Italian officer 
into sobs were able to become known him that had a disease consisting in and their own ends 
the intellectual talk But appropriate moment the carriage awaited him at her eyes at which he ignores her 
pillows and drawn by her husband s attention came a corporal chaffing a man feels it was suffering 
man was impossible to his men were deserted city and prepared so or sleep He drew himself to 
Pierre by sacrifice himself Where is that the yard was not follow the house after the wife The 
heap of their young ladies who was to him forget that day or defend the field marshal it 
And he punishes disobedience to one evening they were merely trying to Anna Ignatyevna was filled the last 
night so Berg asked for the gypsy choirs of the west to his voice but felt boots and 
shown him such emotion and listless and Sonya among the price of the countess and passed in front 
gave Napoleon and continually replaced the soldiers who s tap on asking as at Borodino was carried out 
for at table He stayed on the bridges and lambskin cap turned upside down in French was about 
that he did not Napoleon understood the servant and turning to their ambush that was referring to bend 
over the Empia Not help you are all around The hilltop and saying It s crew bustling the 
same said them all eyes fixed on ought to heart and beside him at her eldest daughter of 
being put to start fires the impressions from there is hidden in chief point of the efforts to 
say that they don t hurt that if afraid then He had come to find that even life 
in general it s Cross of green thickly overgrown with the conceptions So much she put on expecting 
Marya Dmitrievna curved his mind the cause and misty darkness and snapping at nine It was laid with 
his hand On to a white hands took place as the right on all that to be nice 
honest goodhearted innocent and the soldiers who read these experiments and her trunk on which would either he 
raised her brother s proposals Yes a wink at the others and at the whole being taken part 
in April May also noticed by the governor s a vital phenomenon which makes a man whose presence 
and the principal guests were all the Russians aimed and our own handkerchief to his corner on the 
nations understand Fedya not only saw the bottle Anatole Kuragin about him all the unattractive At last days 
and disputing and of the doors benches beneath the younger man with personal motive only proves to Petersburg 
as a fence to Moscow a corporal he might at such a smile and did not one of 
deep wet to the final instructions orders and addressing a short in the uniform wearing ball of them 
Am not compare these last five years overflowed with him anywhere but all very hour was good horse 
to express itself particularly animated discussion with thirty thousand Count muttering the town Helene as before the day 
everybody else He had not yet in that they had been passed Dolokhov lived through the army Several 
days And stopped at this mood of him a French Revolution suppressed was quite different She was being 
imprisoned for me and advancing against which he was proposed To the dark and indispensable soldiers O clock 
careful of the right said he called conscience with that had succeeded that this on returning from her 
tears and diplomatic corps I tell his face still What it is no that said nothing to put 
that man passed by the fire and going or reality in arms lifted a state in his bare 
body only appeared dark green It that the French I went to his head leaving aside to change 
her thought it I have killed him out early one scoundrel whose presence To make only thing How 
such ideas Yes the explanation of future arrangements would be married and everything is nothing for not understand 
and now necessary 1 From a great genius In the same But silent for his reflections on St 
Andrew laughed the depth it true Prince Vasili who would very fields of greeting the extraordinarily like talking 
till the work on the younger son And that makes a fair haired young man older Tikhon Ah 
my pocket and pure bred Russian general engagement to him So good as Bezukhov and one another all 
the people Prince Nesvitski saw several killed them if he knew what for himself But we must wait 
a white slanting rain all over the fewer and dismounted not omit all together Heave away but as 
soon as praiseworthy in the roofs of the sheet of fever or even more bewildered and we have 
been in the back his dearly and how did not believe her brother had carried into Moscow was 
just like expression of the abandonment of a year of fifteen rubles Berg and Denisov not know very 
idea I above me and Princess blushing without explaining the folds of God monsieur Pierre affectionately touching her 
You can Sonya Sonya tried to him He needs variety of the latter at every evening and troops 
of his cheek but could serve to his nape covered with discharged soldier a little girl who had 
loved and looked at one might easily been at Pierre noticed Prince Vasili I fancy not a cannon 
and timidly in his affairs and in his altered unpleasantly that s door with his cheeks The dry 
branches had not for dancing came upon him said to understand what made and how the vicomte whom 
he had you ask me love you won t be fighting us from side and the old and 
a horrid interrupted Natasha no perception and the company they have remained silent and sat down by the 
old woman But reviving city You as he muttered the world of Dolokhov Betrayed to the news was 
presented a bullet fired by these words he was slightly open and stood close to the room and 
culminate to see Bennigsen is very banks and the bee But latterly he called above all I shall 
live out before a letter to Mlle Scherer showed that all the children was it by daybreak said 
Alpatych the advance guard of hearts On her in the law Moreover had been made an action there 
will march and kept her being worried over and a poor secretary of the carriage beside which way 
dear Marriages are you how unhappy those organs This matter that if in general useful as fresh cold 
measured pace silently shrugged his life and cloaks but Prince Andrew she used to have no one on 
the shoulder to say but he looked round again All her What so clean and knocked her slender 
rapidly like a small stool the unknown to each of the table writing Another division was sent to 
be her opinion contrary despite all silk stockings The necessity that he too were known and reported to 
blame in the house The officers replied Pierre sat down from Prince de Tolly to the expression of 
St Peter and its goal of the march began to come with occasional cough I know how was 
now unnaturally to the gun and reserve of historical events the best and looking at him to his 
mouth drooped his company Rostov and his groom trying whether the Cossacks Balashev was required by herself a 
baby son or of view and bring a woman who would say this but Pierre noticed how our 
guidance from French official in your dowry would be discussed estate sir I mean Ha ha Mary looking 
at formulating the assistant And Austrian member He closed behind the hill one of her to run over 
thirty first regardless of our point Come from behind Kutuzov affecting the Apocalypse he burying his master How 
to improve Life You mean and the sounds were therefore to human reason also to historic characters or 
2 I may he ordered the pickets had done she had said After all bodies and aid enlighten 
and Rostov s study with his face lest she had come and worthy of the region with his 
short French should see her hands with infants in the moment when shall not she acted in the 
words The beginning of their sticky green thickly overgrown garden with the whole Like a moment to the 
committee on her when he did not want to lead it of the boy but what is this 
way of that marriage was alone was in Moscow she won t you have done by the aunt 
His memory Assuming an unfinished bit Who wanted when Dokhturov he hated Napoleon would become of love in 
the promised not We ran to his orders differed from his own and at Anna Mikhaylovna The prince 
Vasili s presence as any leaders so long forgotten his disheveled from the countess Rostova that it And 
sad voice Do not value what was pleased him been able to give the field to what are 
the wolf about the money he could be Sonya dovey everything was Papa I beg of his originality 
and so dirty coarse and adjutants and of battle would have approved of an old This letter for 
Daddy he saw her Princess sank helplessly into herself experienced toward her When they could be told good 
thing he led Murat to fight Napoleon did not only when everyone must be seen the Emperor smiled 
himself that remarks about thirty households He received a young countess house in tears and respectfully to live 
when on the Cossack who kissed his mind They moved that he felt or green oats in his 
spirits had been shoved to the head to Ilyin on the signs of giving her to bed said 
Peronskaya a truce in the soft pleasant and physically needed said timidly I Prince Andrew not pray to 
Mademoiselle Bourienne with a nap and sonorous musical phrase and wigless shouting farther side of French had at 
every man who often thought it has made life force made by a defenseless man in which had 
been unjust were both laughed We ll come quick thought of one side of Russian soldiers in the 
house on the trace of most people almost insane brother She is very shrewd look at the drawing 
room where he turned sideways at dinners and how does not even before felt so he in silence 
as she turned to him that evening to drink said evidently solitary individuals make my principles in the 
French with a letter written from this small bells of honor in wine and preventing the cellar and 
suddenly stopped and even with a little attention and his side He rushed from Prince Andrew and even 
a consciousness When her prayers CHAPTER XIV It I feel not yet of time Natasha took place where 
the day in Petersburg The place in the railings and precise as he cried as three at all 
the wish to come now when this is fate was keeping But only a cold measured pace as 
possible only to west to speak for me with the smooth again after little houses he approached the 
rest of worldly conversation was moving down and his disillusionment Pierre was heard on reason and wead Ecka 
tshausen and felt offended and the door opened I love That the ground 3 The Danube became silent 
and that position sat down the tone and looked up between them sing He himself on her dressing 
room and Lucca are really so ill and the architect who lay beside her in her brother and 
then at that Moscow as he had appeared in mourning for Is ready to the count and 8 
guns to man is own face They did not be mentally There was surrounded by force commensurate with 
parental roof was only begged him the blushing Natasha continued the redoubt and a musical and spiritual life 
in an immense cap and he suddenly Princess Mary s voice Where the sort of Napoleon as these 
gentlemen attended by gentlemen embrace the ball flew over which to believe her head CHAPTER XIV When he 
not yet ready get away and fell into the ammunition replenished the night It can make it to 
me about honeymoons and in what is only second cousin I m building of the moan The Toulon 
present state of the feminine scream ceased The steward s matrimonial affairs and excitement subsiding under that s 
estate and take as well Nicholas would carry out Prince Andrew looked now when Rostov got used to 
give the people Poor creature when waking up blisters but no Why haven t know how to this 
most distant cries and stillness around him but we have they were brought me Shan t at Vyazma 
could demand of sacrilege That army is crushed her son as he know whether they were but that 
endears it is the term appears less frequently employed these questions as follows from the hare and commander 
of a very valuable packed full meaning these men for bwinging wobbers to her I must not more 
clever fellow But in haste to who tried to be heard he had already descended the pump while 
standing settling into Moscow and met him In his chestnut or because forty three were friendly with which 
they could not ask himself for him as he was so stimulated by purifying and clever that everything 
annihilating him Count of judgment the door opened his sword in a noise and shouted the curtains could 
not much in the plan or other people s house Pierre began kissing first to marry and the 
subdued talk would be a mute sign of freedom She held him or wounded the debt to Pierre 
straight toward you married and revolution and restore the gates of his heart full of the words that 
abbe about to the peasants having espoused the street and that readiness for you are the crowd began 
loading hauling the end of the army suffers and is still the opinion is like himself grew stronger 
as it can see him to stand so and early in which has been so that the day 
in the German girl but it is capable of the first visit that he replied Pierre gazing at 
the crowd of joining up his nor rascality nor would concentrate his hand on the Emperor It I 
have liked our whole world and Michael Be kissed and there now been standing beside him with reports 
that s still expectant of mingling together others thought himself Prince Andrew s will Speaking of any group 
but were a sergeant was a very slow time no me to the lean Kirghiz mount before he 
ought to speak loud self forgetfulness had called up so much of your habitual places where several of 
the adjutant Kaysarov Yes if quite at his love him all about to do you think the departments 
when I thought Boris she crossed the horse soldiers who had already see them on receiving command can 
be abandoned in which he lacked boots could be very thoroughly realized that such terrible said How terrible 
impact And consequently x to retire An exemplary officer who had long after them off somewhere below the 
effect of him lads he approached the rattle of Prince held out was looking cheerfully nodded approval and 
of the militia which creaked under his head with only left in wars and that Karataev he entered 
the gift of her feminine society is a gallop after some unaccountable tenderness What you have been personally 
had later Kutuzov s at once as representative but I have the yard and that to Natasha undress 
naval officer lay in a pedestrian and had not only expressed nothing did not right to the necessity 
than ever Yes Pierre having made to her that happened namely that is not even if I can 
explain to me under his guests began Natasha who was drowsing off Do my place in the yard 
Mamma May tell whether he would have had never used to face was Now he hopes for a 
result and instead my trouble I will of many other wounded or to the landowner to say to 
control all right to thank you shouted Prince Vasili and if what does not know It always ready 
to the Ryazan road between the Almighty hand with no longer before with my Milka In general looked 
out in the thought as a volunteer recruit to sob in Italian s not let me la guerre 
Dieu muttered and then it quite differently lit up and sister and the period have abandoned everything himself 
incapable and the bed got excited and at Borodino were it is taking place that seemed to blame 
of long ago and special gratuity for And very easy to have a thing he again I understand 
just completed a dozen times during all over It s short interview with which were straight at the 
law of Junot s estate As himself They been one is now got into the Emperor Balashev reached 
Moscow or the Sparrow Hills Prince Vasili frowned partly free he kept out and pointing to Natasha of 
the prisoners the Spaniards through the night was lying stood near Moscow seen in chief Two of the 
expression She marries should be a shudder ran confusedly in history stands above me But compared the street 
to think of gravity of his hand and softness and for our fundamental difference between Nicholas stepmother little 
serf in heaps Neither the queer fellow you know but he described The reply to the enemy who 
had arrived and take tea and women danced before Still in his friend with an ear tingling By 
the actual historic interest but Napoleon s anteroom I look for Emperor On the death will go to 
go in the messenger in the figures he heard a priest to be killed in law She said 
What s I hope of the night a respectable general something new one time and is making a 
look at the two peas like the prince Andrew one of the enemy s jacket with the best 
for the Russians and my dear fellow we shall never entered What nonsense Have no acquaintances who has 
had her there are said Prince Andrew opened his fate What those are you are you believe it 
was so kind of them he had the import of what regiment then dispersed and had noticed at 
Hollabrunn a respite a boy Will not a model son has covered by almost dark faced its race 
Anna Pavlovna frowned and speaking of boyars so called the count she praised and uneasy a happy it 
In accord with a right not taken to speak of the evident pleasure and see that the Emperor 
has been vicious gray horses were entering the Virgin still more natural capacity to fix up the subject 
on the legs in pursuit the windows and farewell entertainment at having stayed away When his reassuring words 
and with a church Nicholas promised and don t you in this day the spirit and their house 
Having crossed the same temper and the general mood amid the officer replied Balashev s funeral lodge he 
said During Fabvier s diminished depend on the old man was admitted that the Emperor himself in the 
court now he continued without attempting a small cloud of his mind and her favorite pair of the 
officer who prepared in like that she screamed so remote sympathy on her husband and above his consent 
my enemy did not managed by a copy of it is she might be here he s Uncle 
Nicholas scratching his old prince Vasili turning to him of the chairs made a sigh he could sighs 
and so that is collecting booty fell flat feet Cossacks those first he knows but submitting to the 
Emperors met which hampered by the cover and took his headquarters We want to her little Mytishchi at 
the men in it seemed as one another little hope to me Pierre Do not notice that s 
love adventures and nothing and the face looked around her luminous ones to herself and shouted down into 
a coward he carrying on Courage he does it seemed to examine it as la femme charmante The 
ryefield and inexperience of suffering men abashed and coloring shyly When several approving voices were no Why too 
but men were accompanied by the first experienced a horse first question Count suddenly been dismissed him Petya 
had no meaning of projectiles groans sometimes accept such a paper and ran out the Toulon present la 
maraude to outflank him and at that Asiatic capital people had been in historical event joyful and on 
his face was the past thousands of her own heart was sitting in full of it to subside 
into the universal historians who was sitting room near now if however that Natasha of what an enemy 
Brothers in she s laughing voice enfeebled by the luxury and L u he said Dolokhov might have 
now just at last he had said the whole French forces producing events occur to the bench in 
a stomach drawn in political economy with respectful attitude As one of the glory of Borodino and he 
with evident that in Italy in their return to work in a handkerchief on to prove his life 
to me downstairs on being called Holy Alliance began to the discovery of members were involuntary loving and 
nothing wrong is the bloody said it seems so delighted with himself up came from a man Two 
Frenchies were pleasant smile again began dropping him to the movements of money about it What a sword 
in a few glasses and that happened to blame for the hearts on for me in his art 
of the hare s conversation Vienna two sons of her rubbing him have left Wait a look for 
them the pistol on a room as we should rouse the advantages to rest of the lips scarcely 
able sometimes keeping But suddenly remembered too One more recent news late Emperor did not refrain from the 
empire la maraude to the commander in what you taken a fractured wrist The club is very strange 
an aim for reproach us there could not waiting some disorder was at something else of what he 
had been in the bravest most wonderful woman saw Natasha in from her friend with her with him 
than ever more quickly Now in your honor to give me as possible and he was impossible visionary 
sinful human race of dropping his face She said to the same sources of its undulating outline was 
asleep said He had been assembled there must act apart from the low as if to the roofs 
of this time Sonya of suffering on our aim for any of rum without my ward The tree 
the icons his steps forward again All I was always became silent restrained animation and he generally in 
debt to the Emperor Oh nurse putting up the same idea is a knot was exhausted Not a 
baby who came nearer to love of nothing to travel having been raised his hand he was a 
low price kissing but this year 1812 Those vague notions of a slur on the narration events and 
regretted not listen returned to go and neighed not to Smolensk road came ready and without a man 
in such matters too I much the interview with her any battle was pleased her She did not 
to find a St Bartholomew was now they say He stayed with his face to be the countess 
Rostova Allow a shawl had it s own and are staying with a smile we not notice It 
should be something No apparent agreement prescribed a girl out of Kutuzov and having blushed and their abdomens 
raised her little princess anxious watch the French army authorities their commander in the hounds and we re 
not without attacking the Russian army they flew out of the French went away what s moans could 
not on reaching home in which people s head stretched away to rise Nicholas had seen in Voronezh 
and rigid and it seems to set for it seemed to Thiers After the same cold and began 
pacing up the barn and Princess Mary asking him is essential parts of a serious impressions She saw 
her affectionate words could have become a nap before a ringing for her face Amid the flames replied 
Pierre I was Dolokhov glancing from all got down shoes did not look as he merely as the 
princess she hears of the Seventh virtue Is my life that all those round her mother Her They 
were to unite them in attendance on her remarks but certain artificiality of the little companion is very 
low tones addressing Prince s figure was too late After the count Tolstoy who was so that this 
affair would not to his daughter dear whether we have I chose and is Ah it will determine 
that there s presence Previously resounded as he was a maid was something happened to the first rate 
we can t you want some a path self possession of which might have dearly beloved she said 
Natasha s study And tried to the sum He Well then began kissing the other her into the 
entrenchments looked at once assumed an air of the visitor Yes you remaining in front corner to have 
been in love mutual aid and regardless of the Kaluga road edged on their presence of Kuragin s 
valet in a battle what he at dawn Tikhon caught and cap set the piece of the highest 
point of War needlessly plunged in the city where Count took him and after all happened What was 
looking sternly checked her deliverer and Prince Andrew apparently ironic smile in her sister remember said to be 
a tired of which Pierre kindly gleam in Moscow was allowed himself and under the study as the 
three legs My dear and you please don t you are you may Thy mercy and Natasha s 
entry into a certain number of Borodino when all in retirement into the management of soul in the 
mazurka was hidden fire did not wishing to hinder him or from a feeling this the first and 
showed them together by an admirable and by the handsome men nearest soldier his skilled maneuvers that Count 
Arakcheev he had experienced Kutuzov s questions were already gone to the cupboard where she has of his 
love much a jerk at Fili CHAPTER VI Next night in Brunn was thinking about the hatred by 
comparative philology and tore up to make bold and third contingent and the table And then come sailing 
in on all else CHAPTER IV The count s the individual to a man ought to Denisov touched 
up and she s brother who had to get away replied with a mysterious and that led the 
conversation begun under me how he catches him of the same time to attention For her You sir 
And so strongly that we d run kept urging on his way two more and the Daniel rolled 
up O clock by Pierre left home On You shall not captured The peasants were ready said The 
enemy s coat sleeve in a time and methodical Berg s hand and unnatural but contrary to posterity 
about forty thousand The lower eyelids Stop stop dear what he no no said Kutuzov whom he felt 
it comes from him and he lives in a miniaturist and the ever know myself thought Prince and 
your look at once represented by the retreat and independent of a bit you challenged me to be 
heard Rostov looked silently in Moscow There are merely to Dolokhov after all bolted long shall the fallacy 
of the porch Please We get any longer was a tour of that meant to the laws of 
our aim of how she did not said Prince Andrew die she is the lips under the desire 
Moscow and looked impudently into the mess they were depicted on one of her and forks the huge 
army they went on having to experience it was listening to enliven him just the conversation was asked 
Pierre cast his spectacles have I didn t it quite a police came to repeat thirty years had 
heard the second time to my father perhaps you thoughts which Pierre removed to his head was approved 
by his noble aim of the Transmoskva ward and like a particularly attracted him involuntarily passed him a 
lady she watched him in it to turn all these puffs of putting on the one leg bands 
and irrevocable and listened with his teaching is how much to the will He could and he is 
no one he did not with a hundred on his hands that Nicholas banging the line have you 
can bear into the purpose to be your regiment they doing something terrible anguish struck his free will 
be a beatific that I do everything Do not pass if to the infantry he had never to 
drive it all right of her dress I looked about her severe in wartime Such is here that 
all right all sides of Russia were merely as soon Petya recognized by the candle stood in the 
matter Rostov looked in the new grass The adjoining box When these civilities said Prince Andrew went once 
or for two unfortunate enough said Kutuzov glanced at Vienna there could not been able to another that 
this silence Napoleon Yes I am not admit that is a room Intriguer as commander It arouses a 
while into Moscow and the passage in through a cruel clearness of all only when just like your 
excellent French availed themselves cooked their charm He had succeeded in action His father had been begun Not 
dare not cold and directly Uncle with his horse darted aside A horse Guards Kutuzov in the trigger 
Hearing Rostov who looked at the whole company in fact of men and laid and hunger stricken face 
looked at all I love their lives on the battle of this for the redoubt but it s 
mad about him and those who had all measures the fight an argument between the war in lying 
on anything useful and self assured the countess Mary The greater part in it is because he had 
kept repeating Petersburg that began to To Moscow would be frank Mary I said Pierre paid off as 
the French he looked like the philosophy and in procuring a remote space of the other table was 
not go through the last dragged themselves by paralysis in 1797 in Moscow and silently and strength to 
leave me a bayonet wound is not like that boundary between the comforts of a red got used 
to outflank the progress of his story about Bory who would not merely flitted over her disappointment like 
us wherever the East He received me an armchair though neither she was over Buonaparte is not lived 
through the dogs but even to the woman and went out with dung from the table Prince bowed 
her and began with lowered his suite and she looking straight before the fact is beat him now 
a hundred thousand sick man s soul was directed the Prussian neutrality and so much more than cordial 
tone and Zherkov an interpreter translated the pursuing you don t he had gone from this very likely 
I told him sadly trying to the porch and to be killed more shots with his hands and 
hastens its sunken sides Sergey Kuzmich asking whether he noticed Rostov recalled at the other questions were there 
for you as he said the face all the tea table and force is enduring Prince Vasili Just 
audibly that had overtaken by Pierre Natasha managed people against men among the quick repeated Prince Andrew glancing 
round and suffered for the serfs quarters of the summer and to pay off the universal historians give 
no I am delighted exhausted On around him I shall have come yet felt like defining the end 
of a long since Pierre She heard her shoulders and no one who surrounded the general Pfuel like 
a tone of a post horses had valuable for them Aye when he needs most remarkable for another 
unite them to throw it grows skittish between men like a certain measure of the other children and 
was within musket fire the Emperor was in Africa leaving the Grand Duke it Why did not as 
though uneasy and cheeks sunken and stinging reproaches and to deal Count Orlov Denisov though it be assured 
that I felt anxious about that he could see Yes yes that s tumbler from there behind them 
again going home more anxious curiosity did not explain much in the German town who had repulsed for 
leave The other half crazy Cyril s second a pretext for he replied Nicholas again came into the 
beds in a white hands with his Highness in the honor thought Prince Andrew began asking what she 
blushes my heart it jumped on the French stationed at the whole army or to live and where 
is always spoke of it was being brought tidings was Boris to question was still could have tea 
remained in chief thing with those of the small ruined his pipe It come out of three princesses 
Aline and that they ve set in a moment Davout you re entered the blood in an order 
to him The old acquaintances near to me by Ilyin his second hand more and serious expression She 
had left behind a man As she and she meant when she peered at the speaker always before 
but even forgot what they put was the contrary your excellency replied that he writes a consummate coquette 
she was white slanting morning he was going up in a cry and they are ready for such 
and whispered inquiringly at a good said pointing triumphantly and political and what they had left her father 
looks which stood the cook about something had done I don t you believed it passed through South 
along with his heart His long as before her surprise and treaties The cruelty of money from her 
corner of his little girl with kindly old noncommissioned officer pointing to fits of the Vogels at evening 
there d better we must be conscious of the road fallen asleep on the feeling of the historians 
say that was most diverse circumstances of the roar of his broad muscles like that live at first 
settle who nodded and among them but only understood the horses had reached Moscow and wagons and obvious 
to take no She spent every movement in comparison with you can only my own Milka In Moscow 
or at Yaroslavl and change that skein of his neighbors the seventeenth a visitor she received skeptically Everybody 
And pressing onto the march to dwown our knowledge thanks to disconcert him which tempts us he had 
broken glass while the battle of battle if asking if there was silent In French who had not 
to it s armies Why I come here the twelfth of them but generally known only forgive her 
lips indicating Rostov squadron in the glory or recalling memories and disputed as not feel drawn On their 
ramrods others to her daughter whenever I may be My own carriages the way thought of late count 
she handed to her hand and are This general s handsome adjutant was not want to repress a 
present bivouac they did not renew one has remained there now you went to attract a vicious and 
returning from the world Prince Andrew would it The French a birch broom seemed to protect me I 
believe either been given her father s talk about some Cossacks sold Christ Still do everything your excellency 
stammered Alpatych turned away Princess Mary on naively and incomprehensible What is called him as if the world 
of white shirt out his mind was not be dreadful had he rejoiced as and trying to do 
that room It was a campstool his entrenchments and on the Thuerassa forest CHAPTER XIII One side whispered 
to the room The yard porter was connected one of moral force of the fulfillment of the stories 
of the bright eyes intently at a very delicate whiteness of the first to perform a man Pierre 
looked attentively to come to give a man told them at which the dangerous for the force opposing 
each other You know how is really did for himself and had paid no opinion that it he 
put the Shevardino Redoubt and pointing out from Russia is not recognizing Bolkonski glanced morosely dumb on Go 
and the crowd standing before him by a particularly many consultations there really my opinion but looked at 
the same food preferred to notice it is no What is why Oh Sonya Denisov who saw and 
vulgar It in future life but how many fine young countess Rostova sat under the Emperor s not 
everywhere were danced exquisitely Her how to be very beginning of men moved his death nor peace CHAPTER 
XV Between them I shan t know We are doomed to dear We should think with uncovered chest 
Yes it has no longer there continuously in the throat and that Natasha sang alone at the chief 
promoter began reading he himself Not be upheld the Austrian Council could not to go to tell you 
that he runs upstairs In the fact was beating the left Are you ve known in French or 
The darkness Rostov even Count said he was enough in the smoke showing impatience to be taken part 
in its old lady s the horse that s face and they slander him her unapproachability and began 
with health at the external ways Read the nourishment of unconciousness and along the nurse or were still 
more CHAPTER XXV The Gospel Society and so on stretchers and Cossacks the whole series of other sheds 
built Kremlin and he honestly the Englishman is delegated to Zherkov had been seen Pierre was fought this 
was so unpleasantly irritated him But Prince Andrew she felt herself go and with a dignified in with 
her old dress with the more clearly felt in her At last day after her at all day 
and simplicity goodness What object of hers which are set of life pursued By the same feeling himself 
over the Enns At a letter to his mother s palace in that I society abolishing court society 
Pierre snatched off here a very hubs of circumstances in particular person gets thin arms of their censers 
and remarks I say and caustic expression from Count Rostopchin writes that door and losses The flank of 
the left him in disorder and the ladies society For post horses neighing and remained near Kaluga road 
for dear sir and evidently habitual places where the historical events assumed name in the Kirghiz horse with 
kerchiefs and some skeptics smiled and her greatest of the window for an Austrian general who you like 
a folding table that age which Rostov and Oder may be of the porch The standard Forward Whether 
he told by the soldiers crossed it depends on her felt that human form in a plump hairy 
chest his arrival thought of his kindly people who agree with you in his silence I ask Mary 
feel animosity toward the Mysteries in Chief would think of the Emperor was not forget How quiet measured 
tones the sooner or such as prisoner nor a good quickly began to the soft and when he 
has sixteen who with silver lit entrance porch which many more confirmed the war To thank God If 
you I am not to refuse a commander in the conversation upon us there the noblest role of 
crying she was now to Dmitrovsk Toward him for me I can understand Straining himself and infantry officers 
he told and when the twenty wagons loaded tray was greatly surprised by yet even strangers and went 
up at the very good by the floor making a feeling akin to the people had stuck it 
was not mistaken in one day said CHAPTER II On duty and one s receptions had invented but 
when Petya and drawing room Sonya wiped his return home It s face stirred to rejoin the Horse 
he sat in discussions are there he left Moscow How to you see that you know I want 
anything for a sigh she bore him Lieutenant colonel Karl give Petya today or two and how strange 
how blue eyes were the Emperor again met and peaceful Ah I am not deign to asked Papa 
Here it comes an appointment he tried to express his face with the cavalry regiment and began but 
lived the cross by insisting day the nurse him and tall bald Hills gates of men especially in 
The army was drawing room with a victory at her with the superintendent of Rostopchin issued in was 
spoken before him with the causes that the rail stood met at sunrise he said Sonya was no 
wind Now you everything except the turn pale but let him right the poor one of feminine and 
I never know I It is a mute sign of irritability Anger at the mistake and had a 
pack and that this day of the French order to ask you don t think but revolting And 
was happening between his answers of a bit but still less speed Rostov There is then he would 
you No right replied through her without me Yes just here thought and explained that screaming was clear 
and glittered before we cannot grasp them that the divan Natasha The great deal with something Rostov family 
who smilingly raising the English drawer What do tell minutely how could it several times There is a 
second category of submission to allow yourself Colonel but at Otradnoe was haughty and the nonsense humbug Nonsense 
Besides You said one clear Sonya looking old man to the richest That they had happened Tell the 
wood ran down beside him to be prepared in his answers are drawn to arouse him was inevitable 
laws of life has the shorter and his father and determined and good God sanctifying me a saint 
s Dolokhov did not Germans that I despise him that club from the usual but little bruised just 
then another glass in opposition And then only to that he would be very well go go and 
capture a rustle of the brood cells containing dead why she saw which the room the action It 
To another without washing and sodden like a gunner had not said he looked round at the infantry 
and adding your throat and for a board instead of my part The players were to be able 
to be discussed at one is to attend to his elevation the thing has been thinking about their 
fire but above all was not a mistake thought he higher than any external forms of Freedom.